Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jasrep

A review of infrared spectroscopy in microarchaeology: Methods,
applications, and recent trends

T

Gilliane F. Monnier
Department of Anthropology, University of Minnesota, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Microarchaeology
FTIR
ATR
Pyrotechnology
Micromorphology
Fire
Diagenesis
Reﬂectance infrared spectroscopy

Infrared (IR) spectroscopy has emerged as one of the most powerful analytical tools available to archaeologists.
It has been used to document site formation processes and understand the preservation of organic remains within
sites; to investigate pyrotechnology including control of ﬁre, heat treatment of stone, and plaster manufacture; to
assess the preservation of charcoal and bone prior to dating or isotope analyses; and, to identify unknown
substances inside containers or on artifact surfaces such as stone tools. Most importantly, IR spectroscopy has
become an essential tool in the ﬁeld of microarchaeology, the analysis of the portion of the archaeological record
which cannot be seen with the naked eye, yet which contains a wealth of data to address the research areas listed
above. IR spectroscopy, long a workhorse of analytical chemistry, is particularly suited to archaeology because it
is applicable to many kinds of materials - organic as well as inorganic - and can therefore be used to address a
wide range of questions. Sample preparation is rapid and, since minute quantities of a substance are necessary,
the technique is ‘microdestructive’. It can also be performed on-site, yielding results in real time that help guide
excavation and sampling strategies. The purpose of this review is to detail the basic principles and instrumentation of IR spectroscopy as it has been applied in microarchaeology and related ﬁelds of research. The
discussion centers on major archaeological applications to date, methodological issues, and recent trends. A
special focus is placed on new reﬂectance techniques.

Outline of the Review
1. Introduction
2. Principles of infrared spectroscopy
3. Instrumentation and sample preparation
3.1 Transmission techniques
3.2 Reﬂectance techniques
4. Applications of transmission FTIR spectroscopy in archaeology
4.1 Chemical site formation processes
4.2 Diagenesis of bone and charcoal
4.2.1 Bone
4.2.2 Wood charcoal
4.3 Pyrotechnology
4.3.1 Human control of ﬁre
4.3.2 Burnt bone
4.3.3 Heat Treatment of stone for knapping
4.3.4 Plaster and ash: distinguishing between pyrogenic,
geogenic, and biogenic calcites
4.4 Residue Analysis

E-mail address: monni003@umn.edu.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2017.12.029
Received 9 April 2017; Received in revised form 5 November 2017; Accepted 13 December 2017
Available online 02 February 2018
2352-409X/ © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

5. Methodological issues involving transmission FTIR spectroscopy
6. Principal applications of reﬂectance FTIR spectroscopy in archaeology
6.1 Contact methods: FTIR-ATR and μATR
6.1.1 ATR versus the KBr-pellet technique for assessing
bone diagenesis and bone burning
6.1.2 Micromorphology using ATR and μATR
6.2 Non-contact methods
6.2.1 Methodological issues in non-contact reﬂectance IR
spectroscopy
6.2.2 New solutions to reﬂectance FTIR spectroscopy challenges
6.2.3 FTIR microspectroscopy for lithic residue analysis
7. Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

1. Introduction

infrared spectroscopy, who are interested in applying IR spectroscopic
techniques in their research on archaeological materials and sediments.

In the twenty-ﬁve or so years since infrared (IR) spectroscopy ﬁrst
began to be applied to the microarchaeological record, a number of
important methods to solve archaeological problems using this technique have been developed. Today, these constitute a well-established
methodology for excavating and analyzing the microscopic component
of archaeological deposits, in which IR spectroscopy and micromorphology play key roles (Weiner, 2010; Goldberg and Berna, 2010;
Mallol and Mentzer, 2015).
The emergence of IR spectroscopy as an invaluable analytical
technique in archaeology can be attributed to three main factors: ﬁrst, it
can be used to characterize the composition and structure of a wide
range of substances: organic and inorganic molecules, compounds, and
mixtures. Second, it is relatively inexpensive, easy to use, and requires
minute quantities of a substance. It is, therefore, ‘microdestructive’ or
even non-destructive when using non-contact instrumentation.
Increasingly, innovations in instrumentation mean that infrared measurements can now be conducted on many diﬀerent kinds of samples,
ranging from bulk sediment samples and micromorphological thin
sections, to artifacts, faunal materials, and micro-residues on stone
tools. Third, because FTIR instruments are portable (vis. Vandenabeele
and Donais, 2016), they can be brought on-site, where they enable the
integration of microarchaeology, the study of the portion of the archaeological record that cannot be seen with the naked eye (Weiner,
2010:1), with macroscopic archaeological excavation. This means not
only that the myriad unknown substances found while excavating can
be identiﬁed in real time, but that fundamental research questions involving site formation processes and the remains of human activity can
begin to be addressed while on-site, and excavation and sample collection strategies (for further laboratory analyses) adjusted accordingly.
This review sets out to explain the basic principles behind IR
spectroscopy, to describe the instruments currently available, including
new reﬂectance-based instruments, and to summarize major archaeological applications of IR spectroscopy using both traditional techniques and the newer reﬂectance-based techniques. Its aim is to provide
an overview of the types of information which can be obtained via IR
analyses, to discuss methodological issues, and to present future techniques which may come into archaeology via cultural heritage science.
It is intended as a complement to Weiner's Microarchaeology (2010;
especially chapter 12, Infrared Spectroscopy in Archaeology), which describes the role of IR spectroscopy within this new ﬁeld, provides extensive descriptions of materials amenable to IR spectroscopic analysis,
and details the types of archaeological information that can be recovered from them. This review presents the development of these
methods and summarizes important advances in this ﬁeld since the
publication of this work. The target audience is archaeologists new to

2. Principles of infrared spectroscopy
The infrared (IR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum is composed of radiation whose wavelengths range from 700 nm to 1 mm.
These wavelengths are longer than those associated with visible light
(Fig. 1). The frequency of a radiation wave is inversely proportional to
its wavelength, as shown by the equation υ = c/λ where υ = the frequency of light, c = the speed of light, and λ = the wavelength of light.
Accordingly, the frequency of infrared radiation is less than that of
visible light. Furthermore, according to the equation E = h υ, where
E = the energy of light, h = Planck’'s constant, and υ = the frequency
of light, the energy of light is proportional to its frequency. Therefore,
the energy of infrared light is less than that of visible light, as well, and
infrared ‘light’ is felt as radiant heat (Hesse et al., 2008:33; Pavia et al.,
2001:13).
Radiation striking a material can aﬀect it at the molecular level.
High-energy radiation such as X-rays, for instance, causes energy
transitions within atoms that are strong enough to break molecular
bonds, and is used in measurement techniques such as X-ray ﬂuorescence. Low-energy radiation, such as microwaves, can only cause nuclear or electron spin transitions within molecules, and is exploited in
nuclear magnetic resonance and electron spin resonance techniques
(Pavia et al., 2001:13). Infrared radiation contains suﬃcient energy to
bring about molecular vibrations or rotations in most molecules having
covalent bonds. This property enables infrared spectroscopy to act as a
‘ﬁngerprinting’ technique for identifying molecules.
IR spectroscopy is based upon the principle that atom locations in
molecules ﬂuctuate continuously as they vibrate and rotate about their
bonds. Vibrations come in two major types: stretching vibrations,
characterized by a change in the interatomic distance between two
atoms along the axis of the bond, and bending vibrations, in which the
angle between two bonds changes. Bending vibrations are divided into
rocking, scissoring, wagging, and twisting motions. Each vibrational
motion has its own frequency, which is based upon the type of motion,
the masses of the atoms, and the strength of the bonds. These frequencies correspond to the infrared region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. When a source of infrared radiation is directed at a substance
(which can be a gas, liquid, or solid), the molecules in it undergo a net
change in dipole moment and absorb photons whose energies correspond to the diﬀerence between two of the molecule's quantized vibrational energy levels (note: bonds that do not have an electrical dipole that is changing at the same frequency as the incoming radiation
do not absorb energy). These energy absorptions can be measured using
IR spectrometers, generating an IR spectrum for the substance. Normal

Fig. 1. Electromagnetic spectrum showing regions of interest.

807

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

Fig. 2. a) FTIR spectrum of calcite, prepared as a KBr pellet,
shown in transmittance mode; b) FTIR spectrum of calcite,
prepared as a KBr pellet, shown in absorbance mode.

or ‘fundamental’ absorptions, for instance, result from excitation of the
molecule from the ground state to the lowest-energy excited state.
Excitation from the ground state to a higher energy state can result in
weak overtone bands whose frequency corresponds to multiples of the
fundamental frequency (ν), such as 2ν and 3ν. Combination bands can
arise from the interaction of two vibrational frequencies within a molecule, resulting in a new frequency (the sum of the interacting frequencies). Diﬀerence bands also arise from the interaction of two vibrational frequencies, which are subtracted one from the other. Finally,
Fermi resonance results from the coupled vibration of a fundamental
band with an overtone or combination band. This complex absorption
process means that infrared spectra are unique for each type of molecule (Pavia et al., 2001:13–18).
IR spectra are usually presented using a scale called the wavenumber, which is the reciprocal of wavelength, according to the
equation ṽ = 1/λ (cm) where ṽ = wavenumber and λ = the wavelength of light. Wavenumbers are therefore directly proportional to
energy, which decreases from left to right in an infrared spectrum
(Fig. 2). The mid-IR region, with wavenumbers from 4000 to 400 cm− 1
(corresponding to wavelengths from 2.5 to 25 μm) is the most widely
used, although the near-IR and far-IR regions have important applications.

The fact that the IR spectrum for each type of molecule is unique
means that infrared spectra can be used as ‘ﬁngerprints’ for identifying
molecules; an unknown molecule can be identiﬁed if its infrared
spectrum is identical to that of a known molecule. Importantly, aspects
of the chemical structure of a molecule can be determined from its
infrared spectrum, because each type of bond has a small range of absorption within the IR spectrum. Organic functional groups (such as
OeH, C]O, CeH), for instance, absorb IR radiation at certain known
frequencies, which can be calculated from the masses of the atoms and
the force constant of the bonds between them. Most group frequencies
fall in the range of 3600 to 1250 cm− 1. The “ﬁngerprint region,” from
1200 to 400 cm− 1, is sensitive to small diﬀerences in molecular
structure. The identiﬁcation of an unknown organic compound is
commonly a two-step process consisting of the identiﬁcation of group
frequencies, ﬁrst, followed by analysis of the ﬁngerprint region, until a
match is found (Skoog et al., 2007, p. 459).
IR spectroscopy in archaeology has mostly been used for identifying
minerals and organic molecules. Recently, however, a new method,
called the ‘grinding curve method’, was developed that can characterize
the atomic disorder of a mineral (Regev et al., 2010; Poduska et al.,
2011; Asscher et al., 2011). Although originally developed for archaeology, this method, described in Section 5, is applicable to all inorganic
808

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

3.2. Reﬂectance techniques

solids and has the potential for signiﬁcant impact in the materials sciences and biomineralization ﬁelds.

The development of reﬂectance-based instrumentation has enabled
FTIR spectrometry to be applied to a wider variety of sample types in
recent years, and has important applications in archaeology.
Reﬂectance spectrometry is based upon radiation that is reﬂected from
the surface of a sample, rather than transmitted through it. There are
three types of reﬂection: specular, diﬀuse, and total internal. Specular
reﬂection occurs when radiation is reﬂected from a smooth, polished
surface. In this case, the angle of reﬂection is identical to the angle of
incidence of the radiation; if the surface is an IR absorber, its reﬂectance spectrum will be similar to a transmission spectrum for the
same molecular species (Skoog et al., 2007:470). Specular reﬂection
spectra are typically collected by FTIR microscopes equipped with a
Cassegrain objective (Griﬃths and de Haseth, 2007:305). This technique has variously been called FTIR microscopy (e.g., Monnier et al.,
2013; Prati et al., 2016), FTIR microspectroscopy (e.g. Monnier et al.,
2017; Monnier et al., in press) or microFTIR (e.g., Goldberg et al.,
2015). Diﬀuse reﬂection happens when a beam of radiation strikes the
surface of a powdered sample that reﬂects the radiation at many plane
surfaces. Radiation is therefore reﬂected in all directions, and a complex combination of reﬂection, absorption, and scattering occurs before
the beam reaches the detector (Skoog et al., 2007:470–471). The resulting spectrum is usually converted, using mathematical models, to
facilitate comparison with absorption spectra. The converted spectrum
tends to have peaks at the same locations but in diﬀerent intensities
from a traditional absorption spectrum (ibid.). Diﬀuse reﬂection is
exploited in diﬀuse reﬂectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
(DRIFTS), which enables the measurement of IR spectra on powdered
samples with minimal preparation.
Attenuated Total Reﬂectance (ATR) is based upon the principle that
when a beam of radiation passes from a medium with a higher refractive index to one with a lower refractive index, reﬂection occurs at
the interface between the two media. If the angle of incidence of the
radiation is beyond a critical angle (which depends upon the refractive
indices of the two materials), total internal reﬂection occurs. However,
a small portion of the radiation, termed the evanescent wave, nevertheless penetrates the less dense medium up to 2 μm deep. ATR spectrometry exploits this principle to enable the collection of IR spectral
data from samples, such as ﬁlms, gels, or pastes, which are diﬃcult to
prepare using the traditional IR sample preparation techniques described above. ATR instruments are designed to enable the sample to be
pressed against a crystal with a high index of refraction, such as diamond or germanium. The radiation beam is passed through the crystal,
and allowed to reﬂect from the crystal/sample interface multiple times
before being collected by the detector. The resulting spectra are similar
to transmission spectra, but not identical to them, as the relative intensities of some of the bands may diﬀer (Smith, 2011:132; see also
Section 6.1.1). ATR and micro-ATR (‘μATR’) spectroscopy are becoming
increasingly popular due to the ease of use of these methods and their
applicability to a broad range of samples. However, there are questions
regarding the comparability of spectra generated by ATR and other
reﬂectance techniques and those obtained by transmission FTIR spectroscopy. These are discussed in detail in Section 6.

3. Instrumentation and sample preparation
3.1. Transmission techniques
The original IR spectrophotometers worked with a light source that
was split into two beams, one of which was passed through the sample,
the other through air, before being recombined and analyzed by a
monochromator, which recorded the spectrum as a function of wavelength (Hesse et al., 2008:36). This type of instrument scanned through
every wavelength, recording a single frequency at a time; hence, it took
one hour or more to acquire a single spectrum. These instruments have
been replaced by Fourier transform (FT) spectrometers. In this type of
instrument, an interferometer converts the IR radiation into an interferogram, which is a plot of intensity versus time, containing all of the
frequencies in the infrared spectrum. The radiation emerging from the
sample is collected as an interferogram by the detector, and subsequently converted by a Fourier transform which separates the individual absorption frequencies, producing a plot of intensity versus
frequency. Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as it is now
known, was a major innovation, resulting in a greater signal-to-noise
ratio, higher wavelength resolution, and greater speed (Hesse et al.,
2008:37; see also Griﬃths and de Haseth, 2007, and Smith, 2011 for
excellent, updated texts on FTIR spectroscopy including new sampling
techniques).
FTIR spectrometers can measure samples of various types, including
gases, solutions, and solids, and a number of sample preparation methods
have been devised. Since archaeological applications generally involve
solid samples, we will focus our discussion on these. First, solid samples
need to be mixed with a carrier which is ‘transparent’ (i.e., does not absorb
energy) within the infrared region of interest. The most common preparation method for solid samples involves grinding the sample (tens of
micrograms are suﬃcient) using an agate mortar and pestle and mixing it
with a halide salt (in a 1:100 ratio) to create a powder which is then
pressed, under high pressure, into a pellet. The sample should be ground
ﬁnely enough so that particle sizes are less than the wavelength of the
radiation (typically 2 μm), to avoid scattering eﬀects (Smith 2011:90). The
halide salt most commonly used is potassium bromide (KBr), which, like
other halide salts, has the property of cold ﬂow, becoming transparent
when it is pressed. This property, along with the fact that it does not absorb IR radiation in the mid-IR range (4000–400 cm-1 cm− 1), makes it the
most popular choice for solid samples. Once a transparent disk has been
created, it is inserted in the light path of an FTIR spectrometer, and the
resulting spectrum records the percentage of radiation that has been
transmitted through the sample at each wavenumber (Fig. 2a), as
calculated by %T = 100 × (I/I0), where %T = percent transmittance,
I0 = intensity in the background spectrum, and I = intensity in the
sample spectrum. The background spectrum is collected, using the same
parameters, before the sample spectrum is collected, and exhibits the
presence of water vapor and CO2 in the atmosphere. The y-axis of an IR
spectrum can also be plotted as a function of absorbance, A = log(I0/I),
were A = absorbance, I0 = intensity in the background spectrum, and
I = intensity in the sample spectrum. In absorbance spectra (Fig. 2b), the
heights of peaks and the areas under peaks are proportional to concentration (Smith 2011:6). Quantitative analyses can therefore be carried
out on absorbance, but not on transmission, spectra. Absorbance spectra
are the most commonly depicted type in archaeological literature. It is
important to note that regardless of whether spectra are plotted in percent
transmittance or absorbance, when the KBr pellet technique is used, radiation is transmitted through a substance. It is therefore said to have been
measured in ‘transmission’ mode. This is the classic way of obtaining IR
spectra. In recent decades, a number of ‘reﬂectance’ techniques have been
developed, which can produce diﬀerent results from those obtained via
transmission techniques.

4. Applications of transmission FTIR spectroscopy in archaeology
4.1. Chemical site formation processes
One of the most powerful uses of FTIR spectroscopy in microarchaeology has been its application to Pleistocene cave and rock
shelter sediments to clarify the complex diagenetic processes that have
taken place in these environments. Sediments within caves and rock
shelters accumulate from various sources, including geogenic (e.g.,
aeolian, alluvial, colluvial, and from the formation processes of the
caves themselves); anthropogenic (e.g., butchered animal remains,
809

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

analyses provided important data for the selection of samples for TL and
ESR dating as well as dosimetry placement. Likewise, at Grotte XVI in
France, documentation of authigenic carbonate and phosphate minerals
using FTIR analysis shed light upon the mineral reaction cascade that
had occurred in the deposits, altering the mineralogy of wood ash deposits and the spatial distribution of bones within the site (Karkanas
et al., 2002).
These pioneering studies helped create a new approach to the study
of site formation processes in caves and rock shelters that is still the
basis for such research today. FTIR analysis is an ideal complement to
micromorphological analysis, which yields detailed information about
the formation and structure of sediments, by providing precise chemical
data which helps clarify post-depositional processes. For instance, FTIR
analysis of bulk sediments at the Middle Paleolithic site of Esquilleu
Cave, Spain (Mallol et al., 2010) helped distinguish well-preserved
areas of the site from those in which dissolution of bone and ash has
occurred. The combination of micromorphological and FTIR analyses
was also useful in elucidating site formation processes at the rockshelter
of Obi Rakhmat in Uzbekistan (Mallol et al., 2009). At Diepkloof Rock
Shelter in South Africa, FTIR analyses shed light on the diagenetic
processes which aﬀected a complex series of deposits reﬂecting intensive human occupation (Miller et al., 2013). Increasingly, new reﬂectance FTIR techniques enable IR measurements to be taken directly
from micromorphological thin sections, providing a powerful correlative tool (further discussed in Section 6.1.2).
FTIR spectroscopic analysis of sediments has also become a useful
tool for phytolith analysis, illuminating the conditions that aﬀect the
preservation of these microbotanical remains (e.g., Albert et al., 1999;
Albert et al., 2000; Albert, 2003; Albert et al., 2012; Cabanes et al.,
2012). By facilitating the identiﬁcation of the major mineral components of sediments within a site, FTIR enables the chemical environment of a site through time to be reconstructed. Because phytolith
preservation depends upon certain chemical parameters, this approach
provides an important control for archaeobotanical analyses which seek
to reconstruct the spatial patterning of human behavior as it relates to
the placement of hearths, the selection of certain plants for fuel, and
changes in plant use through time.
While FTIR spectroscopy has become an essential tool in micromorphological analysis, the interpretation of IR spectra is also, conversely, dependent upon microscopic data in many situations. For instance, the identiﬁcation of wood ash depends not only upon IR
measurements indicating the presence of calcite, but also on microscopic images demonstrating the presence of calcite crystals bearing the
shape (pseudomorphs) of calcium oxalate crystals which are common in
wood and which, upon heating to 500°–600°, are converted into calcite
(Weiner, 2010:170). Likewise, the identiﬁcation of authigenic carbonated hydroxyapatite (dahllite) in sediments, indicative of a distinct
chemical regime, must be conﬁrmed with microscopic analysis to distinguish it from microscopic fragments of bone, since bone mineral is
also composed of carbonated hydroxyapatite. In other words, the application of FTIR spectroscopy to the study of site formation processes
must be used in conjunction with other microscopic or analytical tools
for the most reliable results, in addition to careful visual observations of
the sediments themselves.

plant matter, human waste, wood ash); and biogenic (e.g., bat and bird
guano, carnivore dens). A variety of processes - physical, mechanical,
chemical, and biological - alter these sediments through time (Goldberg
and Sherwood, 2006). Cryoturbation and bioturbation translocate materials throughout sediments; heat from ﬁres chemically and physically
alters sediments and artifacts; ﬂowing water dissolves minerals and
alters the chemistry of the deposits, and anaerobic biological degradation produces acids that dissolve minerals, which in some circumstances reprecipitate. FTIR spectroscopy is particularly useful for
documenting many of these processes (Weiner, 2010).
The pioneer of this approach is undoubtedly Weiner, who, working
with Bar-Yosef (e.g., Weiner et al., 1993), began to apply FTIR spectroscopy to archaeological sediments in order to document site formation processes and understand the degree to which distributions of
faunal remains reﬂect human activity versus quality of preservation. In
the Middle Paleolithic sediments in Kebara Cave, Israel, for instance,
Weiner and colleagues used FTIR on-site to map the distribution of
carbonate and phosphate minerals in order to document the diagenetic
processes which dissolved bones and aﬀected their spatial patterning
(Weiner et al., 1993). They also documented the chemical processes
that altered the layers of ash in Kebara and Hayonim Caves (Israel)
(Schiegl et al., 1996). Along with soil micromorphological studies, and
supported through experimental work, they demonstrate that wood
ash, which is mainly composed of calcite along with some siliceous
minerals, undergoes a series of chemical changes which can dramatically reduce the original volume of the ash. In these two caves, speciﬁcally, calcite reacted with phosphate ions originating from bat guano,
forming new minerals such as carbonated hydroxyapatite (also known
as dahllite). A cascade of mineral dissolution and formation eventually
resulted in the formation of stable phosphate minerals and the accumulation of thick layers of siliceous aggregates and phytoliths - what
remained from the ash after the calcite dissolved (ibid.). This work was
important for demonstrating that in cases of severe diagenesis (chemical alteration) of carbonate and phosphate minerals, siliceous aggregates and phytoliths are sometimes the only remaining indicator of
the presence of ash.
Karkanas et al. (2000) further developed our understanding of authigenic (formed in situ) minerals in cave sediments by systematically
documenting the key environmental parameters (ion concentrations,
acidity/alkalinity [pH], and oxidation conditions [Eh]) necessary for
their formation. This provides valuable information to scientists reconstructing the chemical paleoenvironments under which carbonate
and phosphate minerals form in archaeological sites, and yields a framework for assessing the completeness of primary anthropogenic minerals such as bone, phytoliths, and wood ash. Building upon this work,
Weiner et al. (2002) used FTIR analysis, X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), micromorphology, and scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (SEM-EDS) to map the distribution of minerals
within all major excavated layers at Hayonim Cave in three dimensions.
This enabled them to reconstruct site formation processes, and to understand the extent to which spatial patterning of bone (Stiner et al.,
2001) and phytolith distributions (Albert, 2003) reﬂect human activities versus diagenetic processes. Weiner et al. (2002) demonstrate that
the bulk of the sediments at Hayonim is composed of altered ash layers,
and identify several distinct mineral assemblages within the deposits
related to the locations of active springs and an erosional unconformity.
Stiner et al.'s (2001) related work applied a number of taphonomic
measures to the investigation of the horizontal variation in bone distribution at Hayonim cave, along with FTIR analyses of sediments and
bones. This study revealed the existence of zones of advanced diagenesis and decomposition in the cave, alongside zones with chemical
conditions favorable for the preservation of bones and wood ash. Signiﬁcantly, Stiner et al. document a correlation between the distribution
of bone and zones of favorable preservation. Furthermore, they demonstrate that the few well-preserved bones that occurred in areas with
unfavorable chemistry are intrusive; the product of bioturbation. These

4.2. Diagenesis of bone and charcoal
4.2.1. Bone
FTIR analysis is instrumental in documenting the state of preservation of biological artifacts such as bone and charcoal. Bone collagen can be used for radiocarbon dating, and bone mineral can be used
for paleodiet and paleoenvironmental reconstruction, via analysis of the
stable isotopes of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen. Assessing the preservation of bones prior to carrying out such analyses is key. In one of
the earliest studies addressing bone preservation in prehistoric sites,
Weiner and Bar-Yosef (1990) tested for the preservation of collagen and
810

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

Fig. 3. Calculation of the infrared splitting factor (IRSF)
following the method deﬁned by Weiner and Bar-Yosef,
1990. First, a baseline is drawn from approximately
800 cm− 1 to 500 cm− 1. Then, the heights of the two peaks
(red lines at 604 cm− 1 and 564 cm− 1) are summed, and
divided by the height of the valley (blue line) between
them. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)

Trinkaus, 2009; Sponheimer et al., 2013). The analysis of stable carbon
isotopes from bone mineral to reconstruct an animal's diet assumes that
these atoms were incorporated into the mineral during the animal's
lifetime. However, since bone mineral is altered during diagenesis, it is
possible for atoms from the environment to be incorporated into the
mineral after burial. Wright and Schwarcz (1996) assessed the preservation of bone mineral (carbonated hydroxyapatite) from human
remains at the Maya site of Dos Pilas, Guatemala, using a number of
FTIR measurements. Their analyses allowed them to detect diagenetic
changes in both carbon and oxygen stable isotope ratios. This enabled
them to develop a screening technique to eliminate samples which
might provide unreliable data on paleodiets. Sponheimer and LeeThorp (1999) also used FTIR spectroscopy to demonstrate the occurrence of diagenetic changes in tooth enamel which aﬀect carbon isotope
signals. They propose several mechanisms which may be responsible for
the changes they observed in carbonate composition and structure
within tooth enamel. They advocate the use of FTIR as a powerful tool
capable of detecting extremely small changes within these carbonate
environments, thus enabling better selection of bone and enamel samples for paleoenvironmental and paleodietary reconstructions.
In a landmark study, Berna et al. (2004) published a series of laboratory experiments documenting the mineralogical cascade undergone by bone mineral during diagenesis. Berna and colleagues measured the solubility of bone mineral in near-neutral pH at ambient
temperatures and as a function of diﬀerent phosphate concentrations.
Their results showed that bone begins to dissolve in a solution whose
pH is below 7.6–7.2. If the carbonate and phosphate ions that are released from bone mineral are carried away by an aggressive hydrological regime, bone dissolution continues. If, however, water is not
ﬂowing, the concentration of dissolved ions within the pores of the
bone increases, causing a new mineral phase to precipitate. This new
phase of carbonated hydroxyapatite is less soluble than the previous
phase, and Berna et al. postulate that it precipitates on the surfaces of
existing crystals, a process referred to as recrystallization. The infrared
splitting factor is a good proxy for this transition, since it measures
relative degree of crystallinity. Using this proxy, Berna et al. (2004)
show that mineral from living bone is the least ordered, exhibiting the
lowest IRSF. As bone becomes fossilized, and authigenic (as opposed to
biogenic) carbonated hydroxyapatite forms during recrystallization, the
IRSF increases. The mineral phase of bone and the IRSF are therefore
key to assessing bone preservation. Importantly, if bones are exposed to
a pH that drops below 7, more insoluble phosphate minerals such as
crandallite and montgomeryite form from the dissolved carbonate and
phosphate ions, instead of carbonated hydroxyapatite (Karkanas et al.,

other proteins in bones from sixteen Middle Eastern sites spanning the
Chalcolithic through the Upper Paleolithic. They observed that most of
these bones do not contain well-preserved collagen, but do contain
other large proteins. This study was the ﬁrst to apply FTIR spectroscopy
to evaluate the state of preservation of bone mineral - carbonated hydroxyapatite - using a measure of infrared absorption of the phosphate
molecule known as the infrared splitting factor (IRSF, also sometimes
referred to as the crystallinity index or CI; calculated as shown in
Fig. 3). The splitting factor refers to the fact that the absorption band of
the antisymmetric bending mode (ν4) of the phosphate ion (PO4) is split
into two peaks (at approximately 603 cm− 1 and 565 cm− 1). The degree of splitting was shown by Termine and Posner (1966) to be correlated with the crystallinity of bone mineral, which reﬂects both the
relative sizes of the crystals as well as the extent to which the atoms in
the crystal lattice are ordered (Weiner and Bar-Yosef, 1990). Weiner
and Bar-Yosef showed that the crystallinity index of the archaeological
bone is greater than that of modern bone, but concluded that this
measure, by itself, is not a good predictor for collagen preservation.
Further conﬁrmation that the IRSF is correlated with crystallinity
came from a study of the diagenesis of modern bone exposed on the
surface of Amboseli National Park, Kenya, which showed a positive
correlation between IRSF and bone crystal lengths (Trueman et al.,
2004). These authors demonstrate that the size of bone crystallites increases with length of exposure; simultaneously, there is a major reduction in organic matter content (mainly collagen). Trueman et al.
(2008) provide a mechanism to account for this correlation. They
suggest that as collagen, which is located within the bone matrix, degrades, the surfaces of the bone crystallites are exposed. This exposure
enables the crystallites to grow larger; IRSF increases as a result. Once
most of the organic matter has degraded, other factors aﬀect the mineralogy of bone mineral, including the growth of the crystals. Therefore, although the IRSF is a good predictor of early diagenesis, it continues to increase after the organic content is gone, and is therefore not
a reliable proxy for biogenic signals such as collagen content once this
point is reached. Nevertheless, the IRSF is a useful screening tool to
assess the relative preservation of bone prior to radiocarbon dating of
collagen (e.g., Yizhaq et al., 2005). FTIR spectroscopy is also useful for
verifying the purity and preservation state of collagen once it has been
isolated from the bone mineral, and throughout the sample preparation
process (ibid.).
Stable isotope analyses of bone mineral and tooth enamel mineral
have long been used to reconstruct the diets of humans and animals,
yielding important information about paleoenvironments and human
subsistence behavior (e.g., Lee-Thorp et al., 1994; Richards and
811

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

4.3.1. Human control of ﬁre
The timing of the human control of ﬁre is one of the central questions in Paleolithic archaeology (Roebroeks and Villa, 2011), as ﬁre is
seen as an essential cultural adaptation that may have had a profound
eﬀect on human evolution (e.g. Wrangham, 2009; Attwell et al., 2015).
Identifying evidence for the intentional use of ﬁre has been notoriously
diﬃcult, but FTIR analysis coupled with micromorphology has made
important headway. In one of the earliest such studies, Schiegl et al.
(1996) showed that the presence of wood ash in archaeological sediments can be conﬁrmed through identiﬁcation of pseudomorphs of
calcium oxalate crystals, common in wood and many other plants.
These pseudomorphs are calcite crystals bearing the same shape as the
calcium oxalate crystals from which they transformed during burning
(Mentzer, 2014).
Stiner et al. (1995, 2001) showed that the temperature at which
bone was burnt can be estimated by its color and infrared spectra,
which show characteristic peak shifts, loss of peaks, and changing relative peak intensities with burning. Likewise, the heating of clay minerals, which are a common component of sediments, results in predictable changes in measured IR spectra (Berna et al., 2007).
Application of some or all of these criteria has been instrumental in
documenting evidence (or lack thereof) for controlled ﬁre in a number
of sites.
For instance, Zhoukoudian Cave in China was long regarded as
providing some of the earliest evidence for human control of ﬁre in the
Paleolithic, in the form of layers of ash, charcoal, and burnt clay (Black
et al., 1933; Breuil, 1932). Micromorphological and FTIR analyses of
sediments at Locality 1, however, demonstrated that the features
thought to be ash accumulations are in fact laminar layers of silt
(Weiner et al., 1998; Goldberg et al., 2001). The association of burned
bones and lithics in other strata is consistent with the use of ﬁre by
humans; however, no evidence for ash or hearths was found (ibid.). At
Schöningen, an open-air site in northern Germany which yielded
wooden spears with charred ends from deposits dating to ~400,000 BP
(Thieme, 1997, 2007), a recent study addressed previous claims that
the site contained hearths and burnt wood (Stahlschmidt et al., 2015).
Micromorphological analyses of the purported hearths and sediments,
complemented by a number of geophysical and geochemical analyses
including FTIR, showed a complete lack of evidence for any type of heat
alteration (ibid.). On the other hand, micromorphological and FTIR
analyses in the Acheulean layers of Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa
demonstrate the presence of ﬁre here approximately 1 million years ago
(Berna et al., 2012; Goldberg et al., 2015). Micromorphological observations revealed the presence of wood ash containing calcium oxalate pseudomorphs, ashed plant material, and burnt bone. FTIR analyses of bones in bulk samples as well as in thin sections (using
reﬂectance FTIR microspectroscopy, see Section 6.2), showed that they
were heated to between 400° and 700 °C. These temperatures, which
are lower than those achieved in typical wood-fueled ﬁres, are consistent with indications that grass may have been used as a fuel (such as
the presence of grasses among the ashed plant remains).
The Amudian deposits at Qesem cave in Israel, dated to
~200–380 ka (Gopher et al., 2010; Mercier et al., 2013), were subjected to similar analyses, which revealed abundant evidence for ﬁre in
the form of calcitic ash pseudomorphs, burnt bone fragments, heated
soil lumps, and well-preserved ashes (Karkanas et al., 2007). Subsequent analyses of a 4 m2 hearth underlying these deposits provided
evidence to suggest that this was a repeatedly used combustion feature
dating as early as 300 ka (Shahack-Gross et al., 2014). Micromorphological studies of this hearth revealed microscopically laminated layers of wood ash containing charred and calcined bones,
charcoal, burnt ﬂint, and burnt clay aggregates (ibid.). FTIR analyses of
bulk sediments and reﬂectance FTIR microspectroscopy (see Section
6.2) of thin sections showed that 60% of bones were heated to temperatures exceeding 500 °C, and that clay minerals in some locations
were heated to temperatures > 400 °C (ibid.). This evidence indicates

2000). Therefore, the presence of crandallite or montgomeryite nodules
in archaeological sediments may indicate that these sediments once
contained bones (Weiner, 2010:88).
4.2.2. Wood charcoal
Wood charcoal is one of the most important biological artifacts
encountered in archaeological sites, since it can be used, via radiocarbon dating, to provide an absolute chronology as well as to identify
local vegetation. Wood charcoal stable carbon isotope signals also
contain paleoclimatic information (e.g., Caracuta et al., 2016). However, wood charcoal can be altered and degraded by a variety of chemical and mechanical processes. Assessing the state of preservation of
charcoal is essential for obtaining a reliable 14C date, especially from
old sites where very little of the original signal remains. In order to
better understand the structure and diagenesis of charcoal, Cohen-Ofri
et al. (2006) compared charcoal created in experimental ﬁres with
charcoal recovered from two prehistoric sites. They characterized the
structure and chemical properties of the modern and fossil charcoal
using a number of methods including transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), Raman spectroscopy, FTIR spectroscopy (using the KBr pellet
method), X-ray diﬀraction (XRD), thermo-gravimetric and diﬀerential
thermal analysis (TGA/DTA), and electrical resistivity. Their results
reveal that both modern and fossil charcoal have two phases: an ordered graphite-like phase and a disordered, amorphous phase which is
diﬃcult to characterize. Electrical resistivity and TGA/DTA analyses
show that the crystalline graphite-like phase is reduced in the fossil
charcoal and that its electrical properties are altered, favoring oxidization. FTIR spectra show the presence of carboxylate groups, conﬁrming that the fossil charcoal has been oxidized. These results are
supported by TEM and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) measurements, which reveal that the dominant structure in fossilized
charcoal is the amorphous phase, and that it is the only phase which
contains oxygen (Cohen-Ofri et al., 2007). These results lead Cohen-Ofri
et al. (2006) to hypothesize that during diagenesis, the graphite-like
phase of charcoal is oxidized and degrades into material resembling
humic acids, a process which is accelerated in basic (i.e., pH > 8)
environments.
These ﬁndings have important implications for the selection of
samples for radiocarbon dating. One of the major problems in radiocarbon dating of old charcoal is contamination from soil humic acids,
which are the degraded byproducts of organic matter. These are removed by treating the charcoal with an alkali. The weight of the
charcoal can be dramatically reduced after alkali treatment, which is
usually interpreted as the result of the removal of contaminating humic
acids. However, in degraded charcoal, it could be that these humic
acids are derived from the charcoal itself, according to Cohen-Ofri
et al.'s (2006) ﬁndings. Unfortunately, radiocarbon dating experts are
currently unable to distinguish the origins of the humic acids; therefore,
continued research in this domain in this domain is imperative, as is the
careful evaluation of charcoal puriﬁcation protocols (e.g., Rebollo et al.,
2008).
4.3. Pyrotechnology
FTIR spectroscopy has been instrumental in helping archaeologists
address a variety of questions surrounding the human use of ﬁre. Along
with other techniques, especially micromorphology, it has helped
document the ﬁrst instances of the controlled use of ﬁre during the
early and middle Pleistocene. In later time periods, it has proven useful
in identifying ﬁre-altered sediments, as well. In addition, FTIR spectroscopy has been shown to be a powerful tool in the documentation of
chemical changes in materials subjected to heat during the cooking of
food (e.g., bone), the manufacture of ceramics and plaster (clay and
calcite, respectively) and the heat treatment of stone for knapping (ﬂint,
chert, and chalcedony).
812

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

color-based ordinal scale called the ‘burn code’. They noted that
burning renders bones more susceptible to fragmentation, which decreases its identiﬁability. They also submitted the bones to FTIR spectroscopy and calculated the IRSF as well as a measure of relative carbonate content (within bone mineral) based on the resulting spectra.
Their results showed that the splitting factor (i.e., at peaks 604 cm−1
and 563 cm−1) increases in more highly burnt bones, while the carbonate peaks (at 1416 cm−1 and 873 cm−1) decrease, especially with
the most intense burning which results in white, ‘calcined’ bones
(Fig. 4). In other words, bone mineral loses carbonate ions and becomes
more crystalline as it is burnt. The FTIR spectra they obtained were also
consistent with the presence of collagen in bone as measured by mineral
dissolution experiments, and both lines of evidence showed that collagen (i.e., at peaks 1651 cm−1, 1548 cm−1, and 1455 cm−1) is present
in bone that is unburnt or lightly burnt, but absent in calcined bone.
Stiner and colleagues therefore establish that FTIR analyses can yield
important data regarding degree of burning of bone. However, they
note that in archaeological samples, weathering and diagenesis also
aﬀect the IRSF and may, in fact, mask the eﬀect of burning. They
conclude that burning is therefore best conﬁrmed by color, rather than
by analysis of the crystallinity of the mineral using FTIR or XRD.
In order to investigate the extent to which stable oxygen isotope
ratios (used for reconstructing climate, diet, and mobility) in phosphate
ions of bone change as a result of heating, Munro et al. (2007) carried
out a series of lab-based, controlled-temperature heating experiments
on deer bone. They heated bone fragments for 1.5 h in a furnace at
temperatures ranging from 25° to 900 °C. Subsequently, they colorcoded the bones, measured them using XRD and FTIR, and calculated
the δ 18O of phosphate oxygen isotopes in the bone mineral. Their XRD
results show that an important mineral phase transition occurs between
450°–525 °C: below these temperatures, bone mineral most closely resembles carbonated hydroxyapatite; by 550 °C, the predominant phase
is hydroxyapatite. In other words, between 450°–525 °C, bone mineral
loses carbonate. This is consistent with the results noted by Stiner et al.
(1995), and has important implications for oxygen isotope exchanges
which aﬀect the δ 18O signature. Using the crystallinity index calculated
from both XRD and FTIR data, Munro et al. (2007) also show that
crystallinity increases with increasing heating temperature. They attribute this increase in crystallinity to structural reorganization associated with the loss of structural carbonate. However, using XRD, this
increased crystallinity does not become evident in bone until much
higher temperatures (625°–675 °C) are reached, while δ 18O values are
signiﬁcantly aﬀected at temperatures above 300°. The authors conclude
that a combination of color and IRSF should be used to select bones
expected to have retained their original phosphate δ 18O values.
In another controlled heating experiment, Snoeck et al. (2014) investigated the compositional and structural changes which occur in
modern and archaeological burnt bones. Instead of using transmission
IR spectroscopy, they used ATR, which produces spectra which cannot
be directly compared with transmittance spectra (see Section 6.1.1).
Nevertheless, their results conﬁrm those of earlier experiments using
transmission IR spectroscopy. First, they show that IRSF values are low
in unburnt bones, higher in charred bones and even higher in calcined
bone. Surprisingly, they ﬁnd that the IRSF decreases in bone heated
from 800°-900 °C, while another ratio (the carbonyl to carbonate ratio,
[C/C], which measures the fraction of organic carbon in a sample) increases from 600 to 900 °C. Combining the two ratios makes it possible
to discriminate between bones heated to 700°, 800°, and 900 °C (ibid.).
Second, Snoeck et al. show that as bone is calcined (as it turns from
black to white), the carbonate content decreases while hydroxyl groups
and crystallinity, both of which can be measured with FTIR, increase.
This observation agrees with results from both Stiner et al., 1995 and
Munro et al., 2007. Finally, Snoeck et al. (2014) show that archaeological bones with high carbonate content come from high-carbonate
geological areas. These bones are not very reactive when exposed to
acetic acid, which is a common treatment used to remove external

that the intensity of ﬁre use increased throughout the period of occupation of the cave.
Recently, FTIR analyses have also been used in conjunction with
micromorphological analyses to study experimental ﬁres. Mallol et al.
(2013) investigated the formation of combustion features through actualistic experiments designed to elucidate the nature of the enigmatic
‘black layer’ of hearths. This black layer has long been assumed to represent the remains of uncombusted fuel - charcoal - and is commonly
used to deﬁne occupation ﬂoors. Mallol and colleagues built seven
hearths near an archaeological site, then excavated them and conducted
micromorphological, phytolith, and FTIR analyses of sediments. Their
results show that the ‘black layer’ is actually composed of charred organic matter from the surface upon which the ﬁre was made. This
means that black layers contain material from occupations preceding
those that created the combustion features. This has signiﬁcant implications for behavioral and paleoenvironmental interpretations of the
material present in these layers, as well as stratigraphic reconstructions
of occupation surfaces.
In a highly controlled laboratory setting, Aldeias et al. (2016) tested
the impact of heat transfer from ﬁre onto underlying sediments differing in grain size, degree of compaction, amount of moisture, and
presence of organic matter. Analysis of the results was conducted
through micromorphological studies, FTIR analyses of bulk sediments,
and microscopic attenuated total reﬂectance (μATR) analyses on thin
sections (see Section 6.1.2). The FTIR and μATR results show, among
other things, that burnt organic matter in heated sediments undergoes
predicted mineralogical transformations. In combination with micromorphology, they allow Aldeias and colleagues to demonstrate that
heat transfer during a simulated ﬁre is greatest directly underneath the
heat source. This has important implications for our understanding of
combustion features in archaeological sites, which are often described
as ‘bowl-shaped’, because it shows that this shape is the result of heat
transfer rather than the boundary of an excavated ﬁre-pit.
FTIR analyses have also been useful for analyzing pyrotechnology in
later time periods. In the Middle Bronze Age through Roman period
layers at Tel Dor, Israel, FTIR analyses of sediments, along with a suite
of other techniques, enabled researchers to reconstruct diﬀerent uses of
ﬁre (Berna et al., 2007). Berna et al. (2007) demonstrate experimentally
that clay minerals, common in tells because they are a main component
of mud bricks, evidence speciﬁc IR spectral changes through heating.
Using these principles and other techniques, they identify three different types of heat-altered sediments at the site: heating by convection
from ovens or kilns; heating due to bronze casting; and heating as a
result of a destruction event. At Tel es Saﬁ/Gath, Israel, FTIR analyses
of sediments, along with micromorphological analyses, ceramic residue
analyses, and phytolith analyses were applied to the excavation of a 9th
c. BCE destruction layer (Namdar et al., 2011). The FTIR analyses revealed the presence of ash and burnt clay-rich sediments; these data
enabled the researchers to deduce that the process of destruction at this
time period happened in several stages rather than as a single event.
These studies demonstrate that FTIR spectroscopy, as part of a suite
of analytical and microscopic techniques in microarchaeology, has led
to major advances in research on the human control of ﬁre, including
tools to document the presence of combustion features, experiments to
reﬁne our understanding of their formation, and the means to analyze
diﬀerent types of heating events.
4.3.2. Burnt bone
Research has assessed the suitability of FTIR measurements in
helping us identify the temperatures to which bone was burnt. This has
important implications for documenting the human control of ﬁre as
well as for understanding taphonomic factors which may aﬀect the
preservation of burnt bone. In one of the earliest investigations of this
kind involving FTIR, Stiner et al. (1995) carried out a series of outdoor
burning experiments on goat bone. They did not attempt to control ﬁre
temperatures, but instead categorized the bones, after heating, using a
813

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

Fig. 4. FTIR spectra of bones categorized by color according to burn code (1 = slightly burned, to 6 = fully calcined). Spectra are presented according to the same scale, but have been
oﬀset vertically. Note that Infrared Splitting Factor or IRSF (listed on the right) increases in more highly burned bones, while the carbonate peaks (at 1416 cm− 1 and 873 cm− 1) decrease.
Figure replicated from Stiner et al., 1995, Fig. 3, using spectra available on the website of the Kimmel Center for Archaeological Science.

Schmidt and colleagues. Schmidt and Fröhlich (2011) assessed heatrelated transformations in chalcedony by heating ﬁve fragments of the
stone to temperatures ranging from 100°–1000 °C. Subsequently, they
powdered the samples and submitted them to FTIR analysis in transmission mode as well as ATR analysis in both the mid- and near-infrared regions. Their results show that an absorbance band in the infrared spectra at 555 cm− 1 (attributed to silanole groups, SieOH)
disappears between 350°–600 °C, and is correlated with a shift in the
band at 515 cm− 1 (attributed to SieOeSi lattice vibrations in α-quartz)
to 509 cm− 1. In the near-infrared (NIR) range, they show a reduction in
the band attributed to OH groups at 4547 cm− 1 beginning at 350 °C,
correlated with a drop in reﬂectivity at 555 cm− 1. They interpret these
results as indicating that surface silanole groups (SieOH) in chalcedony
are lost upon heating between 350°–600 °C, which enables the formation of new Si-O-Si bonds which ‘heal’ these defects. This model is reﬁned in Schmidt et al. (2011), who, using Fourier Transform Near-Infrared spectroscopy (FT-NIR) elucidate four steps in the transformation
of chalcedony upon heat treatment: 1) when heated below 200 °C,
water in open pores within the material is lost to evaporation; 2) beginning at 250°–300°, silanole (SiOH) is lost and healing of lattice defects begins; molecular water is created from the silanole and accumulates at defect sites; 3) between 300°–450 °C, new bridging SieOeSi
bonds begin to reduce open pores, which results in an increase in
hardness of the rock (Schmidt et al., 2012) and a reduction in fracture
toughness (Schmidt et al., 2013); but molecular water continues to
accumulate in new pores; 4) between 450°–600 °C, samples begin
fracturing internally, permitting this water to be evacuated. Schmidt
et al. (2012) note that annealing temperatures and ramp rates depend
upon the crystallographic structure of the rock, its size, and the volume
of its porosity. In summary, Schmidt and colleagues' work shows that
the key transformations in chalcedony upon heat treatment are a reduction of pores (both in size and number) and a concomitant increase

carbonates prior to stable carbon isotope analyses, whereas fresh heated
bone is highly reactive. This result conﬁrms Berna et al.'s, 2004 observation that bone that contains small amounts of calcite (calcium
carbonate) does not dissolve in a slightly acidic environment, likely
because the calcite dissolves ﬁrst (before the carbonated hydroxyapatite), buﬀering the water to a higher pH which prevents dissolution of bone mineral. Unfortunately, it might also mean that external
carbonates are incorporated into bone carbonated hydroxyapatite after
calcination, which would aﬀect δ13C (Snoeck et al., 2014). In sum, FTIR
analyses, along with a suite of other analytical techniques, have shown
that during burning, bone loses collagen and carbonate, and the crystallinity of the remaining mineral (carbonated hydroxyapatite or hydroxyapatite) increases. However, since crystallinity increases through
diagenesis as well, assessing the heating temperature of burnt archaeological bone must be based upon multiple factors, not solely upon the
IRSF.
4.3.3. Heat treatment of stone for knapping
The heat treatment of stone to improve its ﬂintknapping properties
was a major technological innovation during the Paleolithic, and documenting instances of this pyrotechnology is a central concern. Heat
treatment of stone has been experimentally shown to reduce fracture
toughness (Domanski and Webb, 1992; Domanski et al., 1994), thereby
improving knappability, and requires careful control of ﬁre temperature in order to be carried out successfully. Heated stone tools have
been identiﬁed at Middle Stone Age sites in South Africa dating to 71
kya and possibly as early as 164 kya on the basis of archaeomagnetic,
paleomagnetic, and maximum gloss measurements (Brown et al.,
2009). FTIR has also been used for determining whether stone for
knapping has been heat treated.
A set of detailed studies on the mineralogical transformations evidenced in heat-treated chalcedony using FTIR was carried out by
814

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

possibly detrimental to the preservation of charcoal, as well (CohenOfri et al., 2006).
While micromorphology is key to identifying certain types of calcite, this becomes more challenging when calcite crystals are dispersed
throughout sediments or recrystallized. However, Chu et al. (2008)
showed that the IR spectra of calcites can be used to help distinguish
between them. The vibrations of CeO bonds within CO3 ions produce
three absorption peaks in a mid-IR spectrum: ν3 at 1420 cm-1, corresponding to CO3 asymmetric stretching, ν2 at 874 cm-1 corresponding
to CO3 out-of-plane bending, and ν4 at 713 cm-1 corresponding to CO3
in-plane bending. Gueta et al. (2006) had shown that atomic disorder in
the calcite crystal lattice causes the ν4 peak to broaden and thus have a
smaller peak height while the ν2 peak shape remains constant. Chu et al.
(2008) inferred that this change in the ν2/ν4 peak height ratio could be
used to document relative degrees of atomic disorder among diﬀerent
kinds of calcite in archaeological sites. They showed that this ratio is
low in geological calcite such as sparry calcite, intermediate in wood
ash, and higher in freshly prepared plaster. The increasing ratio indicates increasing disorder in the crystal lattice. Chu et al. (2008) further showed that the ν2/ν4 values of archaeological calcites (plaster and
wood ash) fall in-between those for geological calcite and fresh plaster.
This paper heralded a major new innovation in the application of IR
spectroscopy to archaeological questions: the idea that FTIR spectroscopy can be used to identify the source of calcite encountered in the
archaeological record (wood ash, plaster, geological sediment, or shell).
The problem was that the reproducibility of this ratio was inﬂuenced by
the extent of grinding of the sample. Speciﬁcally, the size and distribution of calcite particles within the KBr matrix create an optical
eﬀect that results in peak sharpening (Poduska et al., 2011).
This problem was addressed by Regev et al. (2010), who developed
‘grinding curves’ based upon the plots of the ν2 and ν4 peak heights,
each normalized to the height of the ν3 peak height, for successively
ground samples. Grinding a calcite sample several times, obtaining an
FTIR spectrum after each grinding episode, and plotting it in this
manner produces a characteristic trend line which can be used both to
control for inter-analyst diﬀerences in grinding and strengthen calcite
origin identiﬁcation (Fig. 5). The implications of this new ‘grinding
curve’ method, which can help us distinguish wood ash from geogenic
calcite, or plaster from chalk, are wide-ranging, and have already
yielded important results (e.g., Cabanes et al., 2012; Namdar et al.,
2011). It is important to note, however, that the grinding curve method
was developed for KBr pellets, and has not yet been shown to be applicable to other FTIR sample preparation methods.
Aragonite, like calcite, is a polymorph (a variant) of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). It can be geogenic, growing in caves or precipitating
out of evaporating seawater; or biogenic, produced by land and many
marine mollusks (Weiner, 2010:77–78). Toﬀolo and Boaretto (2014)
investigated the origins of aragonite documented in archaeological sediments containing heat-altered clays, and occurring in calcitic lime
plaster. Since aragonite transforms into calcite when heated above
400°, the presence of aragonite in these heated contexts is unusual.
Experimentally, they found that heating calcareous materials above
600 °C, then letting them cool to room temperature (which is the ﬁrst
part of the process for making plaster), can result in the formation of
aragonite. This is a surprising ﬁnding, since aragonite generally does
not form at ambient temperatures and pressures (in the absence of
magnesium). These temperatures are typically reached in campﬁres,
which produce calcareous ash, and during the burning of limestone to
make plaster. Therefore, the authors infer that the presence of this
‘pyrogenic aragonite’ in sediments may be used to help document the
presence of wood ash and plaster. Additionally, aragonite can be used
to help identify combustion features in contexts where sediments are
rich in geogenic calcite, since geogenic calcite can be diﬃcult to differentiate from pyrogenic calcite if the two are mixed in sediments.
Toﬀolo et al. (2017) have also developed a new radiocarbon dating
method based upon dating the 14C in pyrogenic aragonite, which

Fig. 5. Grinding curves for plaster, ash, limestone, and spar calcite. The (x,y) values for
each data point are based upon the normalized heights of the (ν4,ν2) peaks as described in
the text. The shape of each trend line reﬂects changes in absorption due to diﬀerent
particle sizes; the position of each curve on the plot relative to the end-member (spar
calcite) yields information about the degree of local crystalline order. Spar calcite contains the highest degree of crystalline order, whereas modern plaster exhibits the lowest
degree of crystalline order. Figure used, by permission, from Regev et al., 2010, Fig. 1b.

in bridging SieOeSi bonds. Achieving these transformations requires
good knowledge of ﬁre and its properties, because precise control of
temperature as well as rate of heating are necessary to achieve the
desired changes.
Since ﬂint does not always contain silanole groups, the measures
developed by Schmidt et al. for chalcedony may not be applicable to all
ﬂint. Weiner et al. (2015) developed another FTIR-based measurement
for identifying heat-treatment of ﬂint. Their heating experiments on
ﬂint from the Upper Paleolithic site of Manot Cave, Israel show that two
adjacent peaks in the lower frequency portion of the spectrum (at 512
and 467 cm− 1) broaden progressively with heating temperature. They
propose a new measure to quantify these changes, and demonstrate that
nineteen out of twenty tested ﬂint artifacts from Manot cave yield values consistent with heating. This has important implications for our
understanding of the technological achievements of these people. In
fact, when the same method was applied to the older site of Boker
Tachtit in the south of Israel, no evidence was found for heat treatment
(Goder-Goldberger et al., 2017). This new approach indicates great
potential for continued development of FTIR-based measures of heat
treatment of silicate rocks.
4.3.4. Plaster and ash: distinguishing between pyrogenic, geogenic, and
biogenic calcites
Calcite (calcium carbonate, CaCO3) is a common mineral in archaeological sites (Weiner, 2010:76–83). One reason for this is that
many prehistoric archaeological sites are found in karstic caves or
rockshelters, which are composed of calcite (limestone or chalk). Thus,
sediment in such sites can contain calcite from the breakdown of the
roof and walls of the shelter, as well as travertines formed in karstic
systems. Calcite is also a common mineral in sediments such as loess.
Both of these types of calcite are geogenic, although they can have a
biogenic origin (i.e. microfossils). Human pyrotechnical activities can
also produce calcite: plaster, widely used throughout the Neolithic and
Iron Age in the Near East, is composed of pyrogenic calcite. Likewise,
the burning of wood produces pyrogenic calcite, as calcium oxalate
crystals found in wood decompose to calcite during burning. Finally,
eggshells and some mollusk shells are composed of biogenic calcite,
which can end up in sites as food remains.
Calcite can therefore come from a number of diﬀerent sources, and
identifying its source can provide important information about human
activities. It can also reveal information about site formation processes
as the calcite may undergo post-burial changes to more ordered states.
Calcite readily dissolves when it is wet; the carbonate (CO3) ions released into the groundwater upon its dissolution buﬀer the pH to
around 8.2, which is excellent for the preservation of bone mineral, but
too high for good silica phytolith preservation (Weiner, 2010:143) and
815

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

under consideration. However, sometimes, even minimal destruction
such as this is either undesirable, in the case of valuable or unique
artifacts, or not feasible, when these residues are too small to be removed. The search for non-contact methods of IR spectroscopy has
therefore led to the development of some of the reﬂectance-based
methods described earlier, including FTIR microspectroscopy. The application of FTIR microspectroscopy to lithic residue analysis is described in detail in Section 6.2.

originates from the air at the time of its formation. This method has the
potential to be used to date archaeological plasters and the ash from
combustion features when charcoal is absent, and as such represents an
important new application of radiocarbon dating.
4.4. Residue analysis
Because FTIR analysis is suitable for analyzing extremely small
samples, it has proven useful for characterizing unknown residues located in or on artifacts. For instance, Maniatis and Tsirtsoni (2002) used
FTIR analysis to identify the contents of a black residue on the inside of
a ceramic vessel from the Neolithic site of Dikili Tash in Greece. Although this residue had been assumed to be organic, FTIR spectroscopy
showed that it was composed primarily of calcite; SEM-EDS and optical
microscopy revealed the crust to be composed of iron oxides, and the
authors interpreted it as having been a hematite pigment that was
converted to magnetite and maghemite during a destruction ﬁre, and
subsequently cemented by calcite. Giachi et al. (2013) investigated
medicine tablets found in a tin pyxis recovered from a 2nd c. BCE
Etruscan shipwreck. SEM, SEM-EDS, FTIR, XRD and GC/MS analyses
were applied in order to identify the ingredients in these medicines.
FTIR spectroscopy revealed the presence of hydrozincite and starch,
which are known to have been used as ingredients in medicines and
cosmetics, respectively.
FTIR analysis has also been useful for characterizing hafting residues. For instance, Shaham et al. (2010) used FTIR to investigate red
staining on a crescent-shaped ﬂint artifact from the PPNA site of
Gesher. Due to its location on both faces of the artifact, adjacent to the
abruptly retouched edge, this staining was assumed to be related to
hafting. FTIR analysis of the material showed the presence of calcite,
clay, and hematite, and SEM images and SEM-EDS analyses revealed
the presence of vegetal ﬁbers and elements consistent with calcite and
hematite. XRD patterns conﬁrmed the FTIR results. Based upon these
lines of evidence and upon ethnographic and archaeological studies of
hafting, the authors concluded that the red stain is the remains of an
adhesive made using a clayey mud, ochre-like minerals, and quartz and
vegetal material as loaders. Mud plasters have been documented from
Natuﬁan and PPNB sites, strengthening this interpretation.
Helwig et al. (2014) used FTIR and other analytical techniques to
characterize the adhesive residues on stone points recovered from
melting ice patches in northwestern Canada. They mounted small
fragments of the samples on a diamond anvil cell and analyzed them via
FTIR spectroscopy in transmission mode. Their GC-MS analyses revealed that these adhesives are composed of spruce resin in almost all
cases. FTIR spectra were consistent with these results, and showed,
furthermore, that diterpenoid spruce resin can be distinguished from
callus resin, due to the substituted aromatic structures of the lignan
components in callus resin.
Finally, Shillito et al. (2009) demonstrate that FTIR spectroscopy is
useful as a rapid screening tool prior to the selection of more expensive
and time-consuming analytical techniques such as GC-MS. For instance,
the presence of a strong phosphate (PO4) doublet at 602 cm− 1/
562 cm− 1 in a coprolite was correlated with the presence of fecal
biomarkers in the same coprolite as identiﬁed using GC-MS. On the
other hand, two other samples which lacked the doublet were found not
to contain suﬃcient residue to quantify via GC-MS. Shillito et al. (2009)
also showed that pottery samples can be screened for resin and other
organic residues using FTIR, which reveals the presence of diﬀerent
organic components (e.g., foodstuﬀs and triterpenoid resins) as conﬁrmed by GC-MS analyses.
These studies illustrate the usefulness of FTIR spectroscopy in the
identiﬁcation of a wide range of unknown organic and inorganic residues, especially when used in conjunction with other analytical
techniques. FTIR spectroscopy, when used with the KBr pellet sample
preparation method, can be classiﬁed as microdestructive, in that it
requires the destruction of a very small portion of the artifact or residue

5. Methodological issues involving transmission FTIR
spectroscopy
Transmission FTIR spectroscopy carried out on samples prepared as
KBr pellets has been the gold standard for the method for over ﬁfty
years. As described in Section 3.1, sample preparation for this method
involves grinding a sample into a powder, mixing it with KBr, and
pressing the mixture under high pressure to create a transparent disk
which is then placed in the light path of the spectrometer. It has long
been known that when using this method, variables like particle size,
sample concentration, and crystal size need to be controlled (e.g.,
Termine and Posner, 1966). Generally, appropriate concentrations and
consistent grinding by hand are easy to achieve with a little practice.
However, Surovell and Stiner (2001) investigated the eﬀect of particle
size on measurements of the bone splitting factor when they suspected
the presence of a systematic bias due to sample preparation. They
discovered, in a controlled experiment in which three separate individuals prepared 10 KBr pellets from the same stock powder each,
that the IRSFs produced by one of the individuals were signiﬁcantly
lower than those produced by the other two individuals. This was a
problem since IRSF is supposed to be a measure of the crystallinity of
bone which can be used to assess relative degrees of burning or diagenesis. Yet, from a single bone fragment, they were able to obtain IRSFs
ranging from 2.78 to 3.78. Their subsequent experiments showed that
intensive grinding of bone causes IRSF to decrease; they attribute this to
an alteration of the crystalline structure of carbonated hydroxyapatite
crystals by over-intensive grinding. In order to mitigate this problem, as
well as increase the replicability of measurements, they advocate the
replacement of hand-grinding of samples by mechanical grinding in a
ball mill and sifting of the resulting powder.
The problem raised by Surovell and Stiner has led a number of researchers to favor FTIR-ATR spectroscopy instead of the KBr pellet
method (e.g., Stathopoulou et al., 2008; Thompson et al., 2009;
Hollund et al., 2013; Beasley et al., 2014; discussed below in Section
6.1.1). However, the grinding curve method developed for calcite
(Regev et al., 2010; Poduska et al., 2011) and bone mineral (Asscher
et al., 2011) has now eﬀectively resolved the problem. As described
earlier (in Section 4.3.4), in order to control for the relationship between grinding intensity and peak width, Regev et al. (2010) introduced the grinding curve technique for calcite analysis, which plots
the normalized heights of the ν2 and ν4 peaks for successively ground
and measured samples. This produces a characteristic trend line which
can be used both to control for inter-analyst diﬀerences in grinding and
to obtain information on crystallinity, which helps determine the origin
of the calcite (biogenic, geogenic, or pyrogenic). The reasons for peak
sharpening with grinding are described by Poduska et al., 2011:
Duyckaerts (1959) had shown that as the size of particles is reduced
through grinding, they become more evenly distributed throughout the
matrix (KBr), permitting more energy to be absorbed by the pellet.
Thus, when plotted on the grinding curve, all of the points that fall on
the same curve are samples with the same crystallinity, but diﬀerent
particle sizes. On the other hand, the shifts of these curves relative to
the end-members reveal information about the degree of local crystalline order (Fig. 5). These grinding curves therefore decouple sample
preparation inﬂuences from diﬀerences in the intrinsic structural order
in the material. The implications of this new method are signiﬁcant, not
only for archaeology, but for materials sciences and biomineralization
816

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

6.1.1. ATR versus the KBr-pellet technique for assessing bone diagenesis and
bone burning
Several recent studies on bone diagenesis have claimed that ATR is
superior to the KBr pellet technique. The basis for this claim is, ﬁrst,
that ATR is not susceptible to the optical eﬀects of particle size and
dispersion within the embedding matrix that aﬀect peak shapes produced using KBr pellets. Thompson et al., 2009 have concluded that
ATR measurements are therefore not susceptible to the grinding eﬀect
noted by Surovell and Stiner (2001). Second, it has also been suggested
that the use of KBr can result in chemical alterations of a sample, such
as hydration and ion exchange (e.g., Stathopoulou et al., 2008). For
instance, in a study comparing FTIR-ATR measurements on bone
powder mixed with KBr in a 1:10 ratio versus pure bone powder,
Hollund et al. (2013) found that the addition of KBr results in lower,
broader peaks and hence a lower infrared splitting factor (IRSF). Third,
the KBr pellet technique is seen as ‘messy’ and time-consuming (e.g.,
Thompson et al., 2009), especially if the grinding protocol from
Surovell and Stiner (2001) is used.
The ATR sample preparation method is undoubtedly fast and easy
for many types of samples, especially liquids and semi-solids. However,
as mentioned above, the method depends upon establishing good contact between the sample and the crystal. Solids, therefore, should be
ground to a powder using an agate mortar and pestle - this reduces
particle size, ensuring better contact with the crystal when they are
ﬂattened against it by the clamp (Smith 2011:143). Therefore, preparing samples for ATR analysis is only marginally faster than preparing them for transmission analysis using KBr pellets.
More importantly, ATR spectra are known to diﬀer from KBr spectra
because the depth of penetration (DP) of the evanescent wave depends
upon the refractive indices of the crystal and the sample, the angle of
incidence of the beam, and the wavelength of the IR radiation, as seen
in the following equation (Smith, 2011:131):

as well, because they provide a fast and easy mechanism for monitoring
the crystallinity of solid materials using very small amounts of sample.
Asscher et al., 2011 applied the grinding curve technique to differentiate between particle size and atomic disorder in carbonate hydroxyapatite from enamel, dentine, cementum, and bone. They create
grinding curves by plotting the IRSF against the FWHM (full width at
half maximum height) of the major phosphate (PO4) absorption peak at
1035 cm-1. Like the calcite grinding curves, the shapes of the carbonate
hydroxyapatite grinding curves reﬂect particle size eﬀects, while the
locations of the trend lines on the plot reﬂect atomic disorder eﬀects.
They show that diﬀerences in atomic disorder exist between bone,
dentine, and even enamel crystals from modern taxa which reﬂect
crystal size or disorder within the crystal lattice. They also show that
the IRSF remains constant once FWHM of the peak at 1035 cm− 1
reaches below 100; this demonstrates that well-ground samples produce reproducible spectra, and is consistent with the observation by
Poduska et al., 2011 that well-ground calcite samples also produce reproducible spectra, since they localize near the end of grinding curves
where further grindings have little eﬀect on analyzed peak ratios. The
grinding curve method, in other words, seems to solve the problems
noted by Surovell and Stiner (2001) regarding reproducibility; in addition, it provides a new measure of crystallinity.

6. Principal applications of reﬂectance FTIR spectroscopy in
archaeology
Although sample preparation for transmission FTIR spectroscopy is
easy and requires only a few milligrams of sample, reﬂectance FTIR
spectroscopy, which can be non-destructive, is sometimes preferable.
Reﬂectance-based methods oﬀer several advantages to traditional
transmission-based methods. Some methods, such as FTIR microspectroscopy and Fiber-optic reﬂectance spectroscopy (FORS), are noncontact and, hence, non-destructive. Others, such as ATR and μATR are
contact methods requiring a ﬂat surface, and are thus applicable to
fewer materials. However, ATR methods are less susceptible to optical
eﬀects than non-contact reﬂectance FTIR measurement techniques, and
are therefore preferred in many cases.

DP = 1/[2πWn c (sin2 θ − n2sc )1/2]

(1)

where DP = depth of penetration, W = wavenumber, nc = refractive
index of ATR crystal, θ = angle of incidence, and nsc = the refractive
index of the sample (nsample) divided by the refractive index of the
crystal (ncrystal). This has several implications. First, it means that light
with longer wavelengths (lower wavenumbers) penetrates farther into
samples than light with shorter wavelengths. For instance, 1000 cm− 1
light penetrates three times farther into a sample than 3000 cm− 1 light
(Smith, 2011:132). As a consequence, as DP decreases in a spectrum
from right (low wavenumbers) to left (high wavenumbers), peak height
also goes down. Therefore, relative peak intensities in ATR spectra
diﬀer from those in non-ATR spectra. ATR spectra are frequently corrected using software functions designed to adjust the relative intensities so that they look more like those measured using transmission
experiments. However, in general, it is best to compare ATR spectra to
other ATR spectra, only. Eq. (1) also means that the DP will vary as a
function of the type of crystal used, because as the index of refraction
(nc) of a crystal increases, DP decreases. For instance, since germanium
(Ge) has a higher index of refraction (nGe = 4.0) than diamond
(nDiamond = 2.42), it has a shallower depth of penetration. Therefore,
relative peak intensities of samples measured with a Diamond crystal
are more intense than those measured with a Ge crystal; the two spectra
are not comparable.
A number of studies have argued that despite these drawbacks, the
ATR technique produces similar results as the KBr technique (e.g., Dal
Sasso et al., 2016). Stathopoulou et al. (2008) show that ATR data are
comparable with other lines of evidence, such as XRD, in a study of the
diagenesis of fossil bones from three sites in Greece (dating to the
Miocene and Pleistocene). Using XRD data, they identify changes to the
crystal structure of carbonate hydroxylapatite that occur with diagenesis at all three sites, and show that the XRD data correlate with the
ATR data. However, others showed that, although IR absorbance frequencies are the same whether bone is measured using ATR or KBr

6.1. Contact methods: FTIR-ATR and μATR
In ATR spectroscopy, the material to be measured is pressed against a
crystal with a high index of refraction, such as diamond or germanium (see
Section 3.2). The radiation beam is passed through the crystal, and allowed to reﬂect from the crystal/sample interface multiple times before
being collected by the detector. Micro-ATR (μATR) spectroscopy is based
upon the same principle, but combines the optics of a microscope for
accurate positioning of a crystal that has a smaller spot size, permitting
only one reﬂection. ATR and μATR spectroscopy have become popular due
to the ease of use of these methods and the variety of sample types which
they can analyze. ATR requires little or no sample preparation for materials which can be pressed ﬁrmly against the crystal - the method depends
upon good contact between the sample and the crystal - therefore, it is
particularly suitable for soft or sticky substances which cannot easily be
ground as required by the traditional KBr pellet technique. Hard samples,
such as bone, can also be analyzed via ATR, but need to be powdered prior
to analysis (but see below for ATR analyses on bone cross-sections). μATR
spectroscopy was used to analyze residues on the surfaces of six lithic
artifacts from Diepkloof Rock Shelter in South Africa (Schmidt et al.,
2015). Generally this method is not very successful on stone tools, since
they have uneven surfaces which makes it challenging to establish good
contact between the crystal and the artifact. In this case, however, the
method was successfully used to demonstrate the presence of an organic
tar on the stone which was formed by contact between the stone and the
embers of a ﬁre during heat treatment.
817

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

hydroxyapatite) which suggested that low levels of diagenesis due to
phosphate had occurred, possibly as a result of the breakdown of organic matter (there is no evidence for bat guano, a common source of
phosphate in rock shelters, at the site). At Roc de Marsal in France,
micromorphological thin sections of combustion features were analyzed
using either ATR or FTIR microspectroscopy. These analyses helped
provide information on calcination of bone, heating of clay minerals,
and other mineralogical data which helped conﬁrm the presence of
numerous combustion features (Aldeias et al., 2012). The development
of FTIR microscopes with μATR attachments have made this technique
particularly attractive and easy to apply to micromorphology thin
sections. μATR was used to measure sediments and features on thin
sections from blocks collected throughout the major stratigraphic units
and microfacies at Liang Bua, the late Pleistocene cave site on Flores
Island that yielded the type specimen Homo ﬂoresiensis (Morley et al.,
2016). Results provided data on diagenesis of calcareous and phosphatic sediments, and helped identify the distribution of clay and other
minerals on thin sections (ibid). μATR measurements on micromorphology thin sections from a series of sediment burning simulations
were also taken by Aldeias et al. (2016). As described earlier in Section
4.3.1, these measurements helped the authors test the impact of heat
transfer from ﬁres on underlying sediments. As noted earlier, however,
ATR and μATR spectra are not directly comparable to transmission
spectra. This is especially true where quantitative analyses, such as
calculation of the IRSF, are required. Therefore, the development of
ATR spectral libraries and ATR spectra-based measures of crystallinity
are essential for the application of techniques originally developed for
the KBr pellet technique.

pellets, the intensities of the absorbances diﬀer. For instance, in a study
speciﬁcally designed to compare ATR with the KBr pellet technique on
experimental burnt bone, Thompson et al. (2009) found that ATR
produces diﬀerent values from FTIR-KBr: the IRSF is always lower when
based upon KBr values than ATR values. Building upon this study,
Hollund et al. (2013) obtained ATR and FTIR-KBr measurements on
powdered bones from 20 archaeological sites spanning the Upper Paleolithic through Medieval times in Europe, and on experimental bone
heated to diﬀerent temperatures. They found that the absorption intensities of the ATR spectra are often lower than those of KBr spectra;
moreover, the IRSF as calculated from the ATR spectra is consistently
higher than that calculated from the KBr spectra, conﬁrming Thompson
et al. (2009). Finally, they found that although there is a high correlation between infrared ratios (such as the IRSF, the carbonate to
phosphate ratio [C/P], and the amide I to phosphate ratio [Am/P], a
measure of collagen content) obtained from KBr spectra versus ATR
spectra for the modern, experimental bone, these values are lower for
archaeological bone. This poses a problem for diagenesis studies, which
by deﬁnition are carried out on old bones. Beasley et al. (2014) also
found that the IRSF and C/P ratios as measured by three FTIR techniques (the KBr technique, ATR, and DRIFT) on over 400 modern and
prehistoric bones are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. They attribute this result to
diﬀerences in resolution between the three techniques. Furthermore,
the correlation between the two indices diﬀers according to technique,
as does the distribution of values. Beasley et al. conclude that the three
techniques are not comparable and require the development of diﬀerent
criteria in order to evaluate diagenesis. They favor ATR for this purpose
because it produces ratios which better discriminate between modern
and prehistoric bone than the KBr technique, and avoids the problems
related to grinding identiﬁed by Surovell and Stiner (2001). The eﬀect
of manual grinding during KBr pellet preparation upon the splitting
factor is one of the main reasons given by authors who avoid this
technique in favor of ATR. However, as mentioned above, the grinding
curve technique (Regev et al., 2010; Poduska et al., 2011; Asscher et al.,
2011) controls for this problem and provides a way to obtain information on bone mineral disorder irrespective of particle size (Asscher et al., 2011).
Finally, there is the question of using ATR on samples ‘as is’, without
grinding - an appealing notion since this requires less sample preparation or destruction. Hollund et al., 2013 applied ATR directly to polished bone sections, and compared these results with those obtained
from ATR measurements on bone powder from the same bone. The
correlation was high for the IRSF, but less high for the C/P ratio and the
Am/P ratio. The archaeological samples showed very poor correlation
between the direct ATR and the powdered sample ATR measurements.
Hollund and colleagues show that this lack of correlation is due to
heterogeneity within bone. Therefore, ‘bulk’ measurements of powdered bone may provide a more representative measure of crystallinity
than individual spot measurements. In sum, FTIR-ATR measurements
on powdered bone seem to produce reliable results, although the reproducibility and accuracy of the technique must continue to be investigated, and ATR and KBr results are not interchangeable.

6.2. Non-contact methods
Non-contact methods of reﬂectance FTIR spectroscopy also exist,
such as FTIR microspectroscopy, DRIFT, and Fiber-optic reﬂectance
spectroscopy (FORS). FTIR microscopes are designed to allow both
visible light and IR radiation to pass through the same optical system.
This enables small areas of interest (150 μm × 150 μm or less with a
15× objective) in a sample to be viewed and its IR properties measured
in either transmittance or reﬂectance mode. FTIR microspectroscopy in
reﬂectance mode has been applied to micromorphological thin sections
in a number of recent studies, for instance at Qesem Cave (ShahackGross et al., 2014) and at Wonderwerk Cave (Goldberg et al., 2015), as
described in Section 4.3.1. FTIR microspectroscopy has also been demonstrated to have great potential for in situ analysis of residues on
stone tools (see below).
FORS is uniquely suited to cultural heritage research, as it consists
of a ﬂexible ﬁber-optic probe attached to a portable spectrophotometer
(e.g., Rosi et al., 2010). This enables the instrument to be brought to
locations where artwork cannot be moved. The diameter of the probe is
generally 5 mm or less, and it can be positioned either perpendicular to
the surface to be measured, for total reﬂectance, or at an angle (e.g.,
45°) in order to work with diﬀuse reﬂectance (e.g., Bacci et al., 2009).
Depending upon the instrument, FORS can be used to collect data in the
Near Infrared (NIR) range, as well as UV and visible light (e.g., Bacci
et al., 2009; Vagnini et al., 2009; Rosi et al., 2010; Miliani et al., 2012;
Buti et al., 2013; Dooley et al., 2013).
Diﬀuse reﬂectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFT)
has been used very little in archaeology (but see Lettieri, 2017), although it is popular in the materials sciences and earth sciences. In
DRIFT spectroscopy, the focus is on the collection of diﬀuse reﬂected
energy rather than specular reﬂected energy. It requires a sample to be
powdered and diluted with an IR-invisible diluent such as KBr, and
placed in a cup which is illuminated by the IR source. Both the source
and detector are placed at angles designed to optimize the generation
and collection of scattered light. This technique can minimize interference from water bands, and produce greater spectral resolution;
however, Beasley et al., 2014 found it provided worse resolution on

6.1.2. Micromorphology using ATR and μATR
ATR spectroscopy has also been used to measure features of interest
on micromorphology thin sections, including the suite of minerals
sensitive to diagenesis (calcites and phosphates), materials which provide information on heating (calcites, clays, bone), and other features.
In fact, it appears that reﬂectance FTIR techniques such as ATR, μATR,
and FTIR microspectroscopy (described below) have become essential
partners with micromorphology. For instance, at Obi Rakhmat, a late
Pleistocene rock shelter in northeastern Uzbekistan, sediment samples
were analyzed using both the traditional transmission FTIR KBr pellet
technique and ATR using powdered samples (Mallol et al., 2009). These
analyses provided information on phosphate diagenesis within the
shelter, documenting the presence of dahllite (authigenic carbonated
818

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

reﬂectance spectroscopy (Dooley et al., 2013). Within the NIR range,
from 13,000–4000 cm− 1, many molecular species exhibit vibrational
overtones and combination bands of fundamental absorptions. Only
functional groups containing NeH, CeH, OeH, CeO, and CeC bonds
vibrate in this range, and combination and overtone bands are generally
broader and less well resolved than fundamental bands. Therefore,
band assignments can be diﬃcult, and NIR is less speciﬁc than midinfrared spectroscopy. The main advantage of the near-infrared range
occurs in reﬂectance spectroscopy. Bands in the NIR range are not
distorted by specular reﬂection. Furthermore, because they have lower
absorptions than those in the mid-infrared range, they are enhanced by
volume reﬂection (Rosi et al., 2010). Vagnini et al. (2009) used NIRFORS to obtain contactless measurements of sixteen organic materials
commonly used as binding media and varnishes, including plant-based
oils, protein binders, and natural resins. They documented the combination and overtone bands visible in the reﬂectance spectra, then applied a mathematical function to obtain the ﬁrst derivative of the
spectra. These derivatives were useful for highlighting diﬀerences that
appear very minor in the reﬂectance spectra. For instance, the raw
reﬂectance spectra for the four drying oils that they used (walnut,
poppyseed, linseed, and stand) are very similar, but the derivative
spectra show distinctive features in the range 4600–4000 cm-1. Derivative transforms of the protein binders (whole egg, animal glue,
casein, and egg white) also show diﬀerences, enabling discrimination
between them. Within the resin category, diterpenes can be distinguished from triterpenes using the raw reﬂectance spectra. By using
the ﬁrst derivative, diﬀerent resins within the terpene class can be
distinguished. Inorganic pigments that strongly absorb in the NIR range
are those with OH combination bands (hydrate minerals) or low-energy
electronic transitions (e.g., Co- and Fe-based compounds). The authors
demonstrate that NIR reﬂectance spectroscopy and mathematical tools
enabled the correct identiﬁcation of several components of the paints in
a 17th century painting, which were independently conﬁrmed using
GC-MS.
Researchers in cultural heritage have experimented with diﬀerent
reﬂectance FTIR techniques, both contact and non-contact, for measuring cross-sections of paintings (see Prati et al., 2016, for an excellent
overview of FTIR microspectroscopy in cultural heritage science). Polished thin-sections of paintings are made in much the same manner as
thin sections of sediments in soil micromorphology, by embedding the
painting sample in resin (or KBr [Joseph et al., 2010]) and cutting it so
that the stratiﬁed layers containing mixtures of binders, pigments,
drying oils, resins, and so forth can be analyzed. Just as micromorphologists have applied both contact and non-contact techniques to
the study of thin sections, cultural heritage researchers have experimented with these techniques to analyze painting cross-sections. The
studies using contact methods of reﬂectance spectroscopy, namely ATR
and μATR, have identiﬁed some of the same limitations with ATR as
those described earlier; namely, that good contact between the section
and the crystal is only achievable with rigorous sample preparation to
create a ﬂat surface; that the surface may be damaged by pressure; and
that if the criterion for internal reﬂection isn't valid, for highly absorbing bands there's a sharp rise in refractive index of the material
which distorts them and shifts them towards lower wavenumbers (Rosi
et al., 2010; Rosi et al., 2011; Sciutto et al., 2014). Additionally, the
relationship between penetration depth and wavelength means that in
ATR spectra, high wavenumber absorptions (e.g., OH stretching) are
less intense, making hydration phases of compounds more diﬃcult to
identify (Rosi et al., 2010). While baseline corrections are commonly
used to compensate for this problem, they are ineﬀective for mixtures
(Prati et al., 2016).
Therefore, researchers have also applied non-contact reﬂectance
FTIR microspectroscopy to the analysis of paint cross-sections. They
have addressed the problems noted earlier regarding the mixture of
specular and diﬀuse reﬂected light that is generated by samples which
are not optically ﬂat, resulting in distorted (inverted or derivative)

powdered bone compared with KBr-pellet and ATR measurements.
6.2.1. Methodological issues in non-contact reﬂectance IR spectroscopy
Non-contact modes of reﬂectance IR spectroscopy such as FTIR
microspectroscopy and FORS are susceptible to a diﬀerent set of issues
than those arising in ATR and μATR. These are related to the complex
interactions that occur between light and matter. As succinctly described by Miliani et al. (2012); see also Griﬃths and de Haseth (2007),
when light strikes the surface of a material, it can either be reﬂected
from the surface, or it can penetrate, where it is absorbed, refracted,
reﬂected, and scattered prior to exiting. Surface reﬂection (Rs) is also
known as specular reﬂection, whereas light that has penetrated a material before being reﬂected is known as volume reﬂection (Rv). Surface
reﬂection is ruled by Fresnel's law:

Rs =

(n − 1)2 + k 2
(n + 1)2 + k 2

(2)

, where k is the absorption index and n is the refractive index. Distortions in an infrared reﬂectance spectrum can arise depending upon the
absorption index of the material: when it is very low (k < 1), as occurs
in most organic molecules, the reﬂection proﬁle follows the derivativelike behavior of the refraction index (n), resulting in derivative bands.
On the other hand, when k ≫ 1 (e.g., in many inorganic salts containing
nitrates, carbonates, sulfates, and phosphates) these bands are totally
reﬂected, producing inverted or reststrahlen bands.
Volume reﬂection, on the other hand, originates from an absorption
process - therefore, it produces spectra which are very similar to
transmission spectra. Some diﬀerences in relative band intensities appear since the penetration depth of diﬀuse reﬂected light is inversely
proportional to the scattering factor and the absorption coeﬃcient. For
instance, combination and overtone bands, which have a lower absorption index, are usually enhanced in reﬂection mode because they
are crossed by the light, resulting in higher eﬀective sample thickness
(Buti et al., 2013).
Both of these factors have important implications for the reﬂectance
FTIR microspectroscopic measurements of organic residues on stone
tools, as revealed in Monnier et al. (2017, in press). The results obtained
in these two studies are also in agreement with the known relationship
between surface roughness and type of reﬂection: the degree to which a
surface is expected to produce specular or volume reﬂection depends
upon the roughness of the surface. Surfaces that are ‘optically ﬂat’ – in
other words, where the size of the particles is larger than the wavelength of the IR radiation, produce specular reﬂection. Rough surfaces,
on the other hand, where the size of the particles is the same as the
wavelength of the radiation, produce diﬀuse reﬂected radiation. The
surface texture of a material, in combination with its optical properties
(absorption and refraction indices), can therefore produce a complex
blend of specular and volume reﬂection, containing a number of distortions in the same spectra. Mathematical corrections that are commonly used for these distortions, such as Kramers-Kronig and KubelkaMunk, do not correct all distortions on spectra that are characterized by
multiple types of distortions, and must be used cautiously (Buti et al.,
2013; Griﬃths and de Haseth 2007:311). This fact has spurred the
development of reference libraries for reﬂectance spectra of archaeological materials common in residue analyses (Monnier et al., 2017, in
press). It has also led cultural heritage researchers to develop reference
libraries of reﬂectance spectra for organic and inorganic pigments,
binders, ﬁnishing materials, and preparation layers of artworks (Miliani
et al., 2012).
6.2.2. New solutions to reﬂectance FTIR spectroscopy challenges
Cultural heritage and conservation science has largely led eﬀorts to
overcome the methodological issues described above, and these innovations suggest future applications of reﬂectance techniques in archaeology. For instance, near-infrared (NIR) reﬂectance spectroscopy
has been successfully used to resolve some of the issues faced in mid-IR
819

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

residues of these substances, and systematically compared these FTIR
microspectroscopy measurements with those of the same substances
made using ATR. This enabled them to document the various distortions that arise in the reﬂectance FTIR microspectroscopy spectra, as
well as the eﬀect of the stone. Since these distortions can be severe, they
advocate for the development of reference FTIR microspectroscopy
spectra of residue types as well as stone. Monnier et al. (2017, in press)
answer this call by publishing collections of plant-tissue as well as animal-tissue residue reﬂectance spectra. These spectra were obtained
using a Nicolet Continuμm FTIR microscope and aperture sizes up to
150 μm × 150 μm. We show that reﬂectance spectra of residue standards prepared on aluminum-coated mirrored slides are very similar to
transmission spectra of the same residues; however, the spectra of the
same residues on stone substrates can be severely distorted (Monnier
et al., in press). We discuss procedures for correcting some of these
distortions, which are more common on animal-tissue than plant-tissue
residues, and show that when distortions can be avoided or corrected,
FTIR microspectroscopy spectra are very sensitive to minor chemical
diﬀerences between samples.

bands (Rosi et al., 2011), by applying chemometrics techniques to the
spectra such as mathematical transformations and univariate and
multivariate statistical techniques. For instance, Rosi et al., 2011 applied principal components analysis to chemical maps of painting crosssections in order to obtain chemical distributions of the materials in
each stratigraphic layer. Sciutto et al., 2014 used FTIR microscopy in
the NIR region (FT-NIR microscopy) to avoid the distorted bands present in the mid-infrared region (MIR). Using the Thermo Nicolet
iN10MX microscope, they recorded spectra within a range of
8000–675 cm− 1 and generated chemical maps. They applied multivariate data processing techniques to the data to minimize unwanted
eﬀects such as baseline variations and global intensity eﬀects, and applied ﬁrst and second derivatives to enhance details within broad bands
and correct for baseline shifts and drifts. Finally, they performed exploratory PCA analyses, revealing that the NIR region is more eﬀective
than the mid-infrared (MIR) region in identifying the composition of
paint layers.
In sum, a number of advances have been made with reﬂectance
FTIR techniques within the past decade. These include advances in
instrumentation and data analysis techniques which have been
exploited in conservation science and, to a lesser extent, in micromorphology. Continued technological advances in instrumentation, for
instance FTIR microscopes which integrate FTIR microspectroscopy and
μATR on the same system and are capable of generating high-resolution
spectral maps (e.g., Joseph et al., 2010), will enable increasingly detailed measurements of sensitive samples such as paintings, micromorphology thin sections, and residues on stone tools, in the near future.

7. Conclusions
In the quarter-century since infrared spectroscopy ﬁrst began to be
systematically applied to archaeology, it has led to major advances in
the study of site formation processes, pyrotechnology, and the alteration of archaeological materials by chemical diagenesis. It has also been
shown to hold great potential for the analysis of a variety of residue
types on stone artifacts, and is overall a most useful tool for the analysis
of unknown substances encountered in the archaeological record. In
tandem with micromorphology, IR spectroscopy is an essential component of the tool-kit of microarchaeology. In its application to the
study of archaeological deposits inside Paleolithic cave and rock shelters in the Levant, Europe, Asia, and South Africa, IR spectroscopy,
along with the associated methods of microarchaeology, has led to
breakthroughs in our understanding of the formation of these sites and
the human behaviors that occurred in them. This includes the use and
control of ﬁre, spatial organization within these sites, and the heat
treatment of stone. Laboratory-based experiments documenting the
formation and alteration of minerals have provided a sound understanding of the environmental conditions underlying diagenesis and
their resulting eﬀects. Likewise, actualistic studies (e.g., Trueman et al.,
2004, 2008) and the exciting new ﬁeld of geo-ethnoarchaeology have
enabled us to begin developing a more dynamic understanding of cultural and natural site formation processes, especially with regards to
diagenesis (e.g., Friesem et al., 2011; Friesem et al., 2016; Gur-Arieh
et al., 2014; Mallol et al., 2007; Shahack-Gross, 2017; Shahack-Gross
et al., 2003; Shahack-Gross et al., 2004).
The application of IR spectroscopy to sites from more recent time
periods has yielded information on architectural materials (e.g.,
Namdar et al., 2011), cooking installations (Gur-Arieh et al., 2014; GurArieh et al., 2012), and destruction events (Namdar et al., 2011). In
particular, research designed to help distinguish various kinds of calcite
which might originate from wood ash, plaster, or chalk, led to the development of a new technique for evaluating atomic disorder within
minerals. Not only does this technique help distinguish between calcites
of diﬀerent origins, it has been adapted to bone mineral, as well.
Due to these contributions, coupled with its ease of use and low cost,
IR spectroscopy will become an increasingly valuable tool for archaeological research. New instruments and data analysis techniques will
continue to expand its applicability for smaller and more delicate materials as well as increase its resolution. Reﬂectance techniques, NIR
spectroscopy, and chemometrics being pioneered in cultural heritage
science will undoubtedly play a key role in the development of these
techniques in archaeology. Therefore, opportunities to continue exploring new applications for IR spectroscopy in archaeology, and to
reﬁne existing ones, will abound. It will also remain a useful

6.2.3. FTIR microspectroscopy for lithic residue analysis
In archaeology, the most common non-contact reﬂectance FTIR
method used to date has been FTIRM. Cesaro and Lemorini (2012)
published one of the earliest studies using FTIR microspectroscopy for
lithic residue analysis on ﬂint and obsidian tools from two Neolithic
sites in Italy. They used a Bruker Hyperion infrared microscope with a
spot size of 100 μm × 100 μm to measure residues in situ. Although the
reﬂectance spectra that they collected are dominated by the absorbance
bands of the stone, they were nevertheless able to identify organic residues including proteins, lipids, adipocere (‘grave wax’), and bone
mineral. Using a similar reﬂectance methodology but diﬀerent instrumentation (a portable Bruker Alpha-R spectrometer with external
reﬂectance head and spot size ~5 mm in diameter), Solodenko et al.
(2015) identiﬁed bone mineral, adipocere, and plant remains on artifacts from the Lower Paleolithic open-air site of Revadim Quarry, Israel.
Using the same instrument, Zupancich et al. (2016) identiﬁed bone
mineral residues on scrapers from the Lower Paleolithic site of Qesem
Cave (Israel). The FTIR microspectroscopy reﬂectance spectra published in both of these studies, however, are dominated by the IR absorbance bands from the stone underlying the residue, making the interpretation of the IR bands from the residues extremely diﬃcult.
FTIR microspectroscopy reﬂectance spectra of bitumen residues on
stone tools from the Middle Paleolithic site of Hummal, Syria (Monnier
et al., 2013), are less aﬀected by the underlying stone. In this study, we
applied VLM, SEM, SEM-EDS, FTIR microspectroscopy, and confocal
Raman microscopy to the analysis of hafting residues on three Paleolithic implements from the site of Hummal, Syria (ibid.). Previous GCMS analyses of these residues had identiﬁed them as composed of bitumen (Hauck et al., 2013), but Monnier et al. (2013) showed that nondestructive, non-contact methods can also be used to identify these
residues. FTIR microspectroscopy measurements carried out using a
Nicolet Continuμm infrared microscope with a 150 μm × 150 μm spot
size clearly showed the presence of oxidized bitumen.
Prinsloo et al. (2014) explored the viability of reﬂectance FTIR
microspectroscopy for analyzing animal-tissue residues such as muscle,
fat, and bone. Using a Hyperion infrared microscope, they measured
spots 100 μm in diameter on experimental stone tools which contained
820

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

complement to microscopic and analytical techniques such as visiblelight microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, energy-dispersive Xray spectroscopy, X-ray diﬀraction, and the like. Undoubtedly, IR
spectroscopy will continue to play a central role in the development of
archaeological science, helping provide increasingly accurate and
nuanced understandings of the archaeological record.

Human impact around settlement sites: a phytolith and mineralogical study for assessing site boundaries, phytolith preservation, and implications for spatial reconstructions using plant remains. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39 (8), 2697–2705. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.04.008.
Caracuta, V., Weinstein-Evron, M., Reuven, Yeshurun, Kaufman, D., Tsatskin, A., ... 2016.
Charred wood remains in the natuﬁan sequence of el-Wad terrace (Israel): New insights into the climatic, environmental and cultural changes at the end of the
Pleistocene. Quat. Sci. Rev. 131, 20–32.
Cesaro, S.N., Lemorini, C., 2012. The function of prehistoric lithic tools: a combined study
of use-wear analysis and FTIR microspectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol.
Spectrosc. 86, 299–304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2011.10.040.
Chu, V., Regev, L., Weiner, S., Boaretto, E., 2008. Diﬀerentiating between anthropogenic
calcite in plaster, ash and natural calcite using infrared spectroscopy: implications in
archaeology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35 (4), 905–911. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.
2007.06.024.
Cohen-Ofri, I., Weiner, L., Boaretto, E., Mintz, G., Weiner, S., 2006. Modern and fossil
charcoal: aspects of structure and diagenesis. J. Archaeol. Sci. 33 (3), 428–439.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2005.08.008.
Cohen-Ofri, I., Popovitz-Biro, R., Weiner, S., 2007. Structural Characterization of Modern
and Fossilized Charcoal Produced in Natural Fires as Determined by Using Electron
Energy Loss Spectroscopy. Chemistry: A European Journal 13, 2306–2310. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/chem.200600920.
Dal Sasso, G., Lebon, M., Angelini, I., Maritan, L., Usai, D., Artioli, G., 2016. Bone diagenesis variability among multiple burial phases at Al Khiday (Sudan) investigated by
ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 463, 168–179.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., 1992. Eﬀect of heat treatment on siliceous rocks used in
prehistoric lithic technology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 19 (6), 601–614. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0305-4403(92)90031-W.
Domanski, M., WEBB, J.A., BOLAND, J., 1994. Mechanical properties of stone artefact
materials and the eﬀect of heat treatment. Archaeometry 36 (2), 177–208. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4754.1994.tb00963.x.
Dooley, K.A., Lomax, S., Zeibel, J.G., Miliani, C., Ricciardi, P., Hoenigswald, A., ...
Delaney, J.K., 2013. Mapping of egg yolk and animal skin glue paint binders in early
renaissance paintings using near infrared reﬂectance imaging spectroscopy. Analyst
138 (17), 4838. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c3an00926b.
Duyckaerts, G., 1959. The infra-red analysis of solid substances. A review. Analyst 84,
201–214.
Friesem, D., Boaretto, E., Eliyahu-Behar, A., Shahack-Gross, R., 2011. Degradation of mud
brick houses in an arid environment: a geoarchaeological model. J. Archaeol. Sci. 38
(5), 1135–1147. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2010.12.011.
Friesem, D.E., Lavi, N., Madella, M., Ajithprasad, P., French, C., 2016. Site formation
processes and hunter-gatherers use of space in a tropical environment: a geo-ethnoarchaeological approach from South India. PLoS One 11 (10), 1–30. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164185.
Giachi, G., Pallecchi, P., Romualdi, A., Ribechini, E., Lucejko, J.J., Colombini, M.P., Lippi,
M.M., 2013. Ingredients of a 2,000-y-old medicine revealed by chemical, mineralogical, and botanical investigations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110 (4),
1193–1196. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1216776110.
Goder-Goldberger, M., Weiner, S., Barzilai, O., Boaretto, E., 2017. Heating of ﬂint artifacts from the site of Boker Tachtit (Israel) was not detected using FTIR peak
broadening. J. Archaeol. Sci. Reports 12, 173–182. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jasrep.2017.01.041.
Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Micromorphology and context. Quat. Int. 214 (1), 56–62.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2009.10.023.
Goldberg, P., Berna, F., Chazan, M., 2015. Deposition and diagenesis in the earlier stone
age of Wonderwerk cave, excavation 1, South Africa. Afr. Archaeol. Rev. 32. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10437-015-9192-9.
Goldberg, P., Sherwood, S.C., 2006. Deciphering human prehistory through the
geoarcheological study of cave sediments. Evol. Anthropol. 15 (1), 20–36. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/evan.20094.
Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Xu, Q., Liu, J., 2001. Site formation processes at
Zhoukoudian, China. J. Hum. Evol. 41 (5), 483–530. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
jhev.2001.0498.
Gopher, A., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A., Karkanas, P., ShahackGross, R., 2010. The chronology of the late lower Paleolithic in the Levant based on
U-Th ages of speleothems from Qesem cave, Israel. Quat. Geochronol. 5 (6), 644–656.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quageo.2010.03.003.
Griﬃths, Peter R., de Haseth, James A., 2007. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry,
Second Edition. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Gueta, R., et al., 2006. Local atomic order and infrraed spectra of biogenic calcite. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 46, 291–294.
Gur-Arieh, S., Boaretto, E., Maeir, A., Shahack-Gross, R., 2012. Formation processes in
Philistine hearths from Tell es-Saﬁ/Gath (Israel): an experimental approach. J. Field
Archaeol. 37 (2), 121–131. http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/0093469012Z.00000000011.
Gur-Arieh, S., Shahack-Gross, R., Maeir, A.M., Lehmann, G., Hitchcock, L.A., Boaretto, E.,
2014. The taphonomy and preservation of wood and dung ashes found in archaeological cooking installations: case studies from iron age Israel. J. Archaeol. Sci. 46,
50–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2014.03.011.
Hauck, T.C., Connan, J., Charrié-Duhaut, A., Le Tensorer, J.M., Al Sakhel, H., 2013.
Molecular evidence of bitumen in the Mousterian lithic assemblage of Hummal
(Central Syria). J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (8), 3252–3262. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.
2013.03.022.
Helwig, K., Monahan, V., Poulin, J., Andrews, T.D., 2014. Ancient projectile weapons
from ice patches in northwestern Canada: identiﬁcation of resin and compound resinochre hafting adhesives. J. Archaeol. Sci. 41, 655–665. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jas.2013.09.010.
Hesse, M., Meier, H., B. Z., 2008. Spectroscopic Methods in Organic Chemistry, 2nd ed.
Georg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart.
Hollund, H.I., Ariese, F., Fernandes, R., Jans, M.M.E., Kars, H., 2013. Testing an alternative high-throughput tool for investigating bone diagenesis: Ftir in attenuated total

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Danielle MacDonald, Adrian Evans, and James
Stemp for inviting me to the SAA Symposium ‘Exploring the Microscale’
in 2016. Thanks also to the US-Israel Educational Foundation for a
Fulbright Senior Scholar Fellowship, to the University of Minnesota
Sabbatical Supplement program, and especially to the Kimmel Center
for Archaeological Science at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel,
for the opportunity to spend a wonderful, intellectually enriching sabbatical at the Kimmel Center in 2016–17. This paper beneﬁted from
many discussions with colleagues at the Kimmel, including especially
Steve Weiner, Elisabetta Boaretto, Lior Regev, and Michael Toﬀolo. It
was also improved by the comments and suggestions from three
anonymous reviewers. Many thanks to Samantha Porter and Gil
Tostevin for help with the ﬁgures.
References
Albert, R., 2003. Quantitative phytolith study of hearths from the Natuﬁan and middle
Palaeolithic levels of Hayonim cave (Galilee, Israel). J. Archaeol. Sci. 30 (4),
461–480. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2002.0854.
Albert, R.M., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2012. Insights on Neanderthal ﬁre use at Kebara
cave (Israel) through high resolution study of prehistoric combustion features: evidence from phytoliths and thin sections. Quat. Int. 247 (1), 278–293. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.quaint.2010.10.016.
Albert, R.M., Lavi, O., Estroﬀ, L., Weiner, S., Tsatskin, A., Ronen, A., Lev-Yadun, S., 1999.
Mode of occupation of Tabun cave, Mt Carmel, Israel during the Mousterian period: a
study of the sediments and phytoliths. J. Archaeol. Sci. 26 (10), 1249–1260. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.1999.0355.
Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., 2000. Phytoliths in the middle
Palaeolithic deposits of Kebara cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: study of the plant materials
used for fuel and other purposes. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27 (10), 931–947. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1006/jasc.2000.0507.
Aldeias, V., Dibble, H.L., Sandgathe, D., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.J.P., 2016. How heat
alters underlying deposits and implications for archaeological ﬁre features: a controlled experiment. J. Archaeol. Sci. 67, 64–79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.
2016.01.016.
Aldeias, V., Goldberg, P., Sandgathe, D., Berna, F., Dibble, H.L., McPherron, S.P., ...
Rezek, Z., 2012. Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc de Marsal (France). J.
Archaeol. Sci. 39 (7), 2414–2423. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.01.039.
Asscher, Y., Weiner, S., Boaretto, E., 2011. Variations in atomic disorder in biogenic
carbonate hydroxyapatite using the infrared spectrum grinding curve method. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 21 (17), 3308–3313. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201100266.
Attwell, L., Kovarovic, K., Kendal, J.R., 2015. Fire in the plio-pleistocene: the functions of
hominin ﬁre use, and the mechanistic, developmental and evolutionary consequences. J. Anthropol. Sci. 93. http://dx.doi.org/10.4436/jass.93006.
Bacci, M., Magrini, D., Picollo, M., Vervat, M., 2009. A study of the blue colors used by
Telemaco Signorini (1835–1901). J. Cult. Herit. 10 (2), 275–280. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.culher.2008.05.006.
Beasley, M.M., Bartelink, E.J., Taylor, L., Miller, R.M., 2014. Comparison of transmission
FTIR, ATR, and DRIFT spectra: implications for assessment of bone bioapatite diagenesis. J. Archaeol. Sci. 46 (1), 16–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2014.03.008.
Berna, F., Behar, A., Shahack-Gross, R., Berg, J., Boaretto, E., Gilboa, A., ... Weiner, S.,
2007. Sediments exposed to high temperatures: reconstructing pyrotechnological
processes in late bronze and iron age strata at Tel dor (Israel). J. Archaeol. Sci. 34,
358–373. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2006.05.011.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., Horwitz, L.K., Brink, J., Holt, S., Bamford, M., Chazan, M., 2012.
Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk
cave, northern cape province, South Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109 (20),
E1215–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1117620109.
Berna, F., Matthews, A., Weiner, S., 2004. Solubilities of bone mineral from archaeological sites: the recrystallization window. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31 (7), 867–882. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2003.12.003.
Black, D., Teilhard de Chardin, P., Young, C.C., 1933. Fossil man in China. Memoirs Geol.
Surv. China, A 1–166.
Breuil, H., 1932. Le feu et l'industrie de pierre et d'os dans le gisement du “Sinanthropus”
à Chou Kou Tien. l'Anthropologie 42, 1–17.
Brown, K.S., Marean, C.W., Herries, A.I.R., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Braun, D., ...
Bernatchez, J., 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of early modern humans. Science
(New York, N.Y.) 325 (5942), 859–862. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1175028.
Buti, D., Rosi, F., Brunetti, B.G., Miliani, C., 2013. In-situ identiﬁcation of copper-based
green pigments on paintings and manuscripts by reﬂection FTIR. Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 405 (8), 2699–2711. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00216-013-6707-6.
Cabanes, D., Gadot, Y., Cabanes, M., Finkelstein, I., Weiner, S., Shahack-Gross, R., 2012.

821

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

High and Low Ph: Implications for 14C Sample Preparation and Charcoal
Preservation. Radiocarbon 50, 289–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0033822200033592.
Regev, L., Poduska, K.M., Addadi, L., Weiner, S., Boaretto, E., 2010. Distinguishing between calcites formed by diﬀerent mechanisms using infrared spectrometry: archaeological applications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 37 (12), 3022–3029. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jas.2010.06.027.
Richards, M.P., Trinkaus, E., 2009. Isotopic evidence for the diets of European
Neanderthals and early modern humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 (38),
16034–16039. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903821106.
Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of ﬁre in Europe.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 (13), 5209–5214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1018116108/-/DCSupplemental.www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.
1018116108.
Rosi, F., Daveri, A., Doherty, B., Nazzareni, S., Brunetti, B.G., Sgamellotti, A., Miliani, C.,
2010. On the use of overtone and combination bands for the analysis of the CaSO4H2O system by mid-infrared reﬂection spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 64 (8),
956–963.
Rosi, F., Federici, A., Brunetti, B.G., Sgamellotti, A., Clementi, S., Miliani, C., 2011.
Multivariate chemical mapping of pigments and binders in easel painting cross-sections by micro IR reﬂection spectroscopy. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 399 (9), 3133–3145.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00216-010-4239-x.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in Hayonim and
Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and
their archaeological implications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 23, 763–781. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1006/jasc.1996.0071.
Schmidt, P., Badou, A., Fröhlich, F., 2011. Detailed FT near-infrared study of the behaviour of water and hydroxyl in sedimentary length-fast chalcedony, SiO 2, upon heat
treatment. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 81 (1), 552–559. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2011.06.050.
Schmidt, P., Fröhlich, F., 2011. Temperature dependent crystallographic transformations
in chalcedony, SiO2, assessed in mid infrared spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol.
Biomol. Spectrosc. 78 (5), 1476–1481. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2011.01.036.
Schmidt, P., Léa, V., Sciau, P., Fröhlich, F., 2013. Detecting and quantifying heat treatment of ﬂint and other silica rocks: a new non-destructive method applied to heattreated ﬂint from the neolithic chassey culture, southern France. Archaeometry 55
(5), 794–805. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4754.2012.00712.x.
Schmidt, P., Masse, S., Laurent, G., Slodczyk, A., Le Bourhis, E., Perrenoud, C., ...
Fröhlich, F., 2012. Crystallographic and structural transformations of sedimentary
chalcedony in ﬂint upon heat treatment. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39 (1), 135–144. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2011.09.012.
Schmidt, P., Porraz, G., Bellot-Gurlet, L., February, E., Ligouis, B., Paris, C., ... Conard,
N.J., 2015. A previously undescribed organic residue sheds light on heat treatment in
the middle stone age. J. Hum. Evol. 85, 22–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.
2015.05.001.
Sciutto, G., Prati, S., Bonacini, I., Oliveri, P., Mazzeo, R., 2014. FT-NIR microscopy: an
advanced spectroscopic approach for the characterisation of paint cross-sections.
Microchem. J. 112, 87–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2013.09.021.
Shahack-Gross, R., 2017. Archaeological formation theory and geoarchaeology: state-ofthe-art in 2016. J. Archaeol. Sci. 79, 36–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2017.01.
004.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Lemorini, C., Gopher, A., Barkai, R., 2014.
Evidence for the repeated use of a central hearth at middle Pleistocene (300 ky ago)
Qesem cave, Israel. J. Archaeol. Sci. 44 (1), 12–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.
2013.11.015.
Shahack-Gross, R., Marshall, F., Ryan, K., Weiner, S., 2004. Reconstruction of spatial
organization in abandoned Maasai settlements: implications for site structure in the
pastoral Neolithic of East Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31 (10), 1395–1411. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jas.2004.03.003.
Shahack-Gross, R., Marshall, F., Weiner, S., 2003. Geo-ethnoarchaeology of pastoral sites:
the identiﬁcation of livestock enclosures in abandoned Maasai settlements. J.
Archaeol. Sci. 30 (4), 439–459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2002.0853.
Shaham, D., Grosman, L., Goren-Inbar, N., 2010. The red-stained ﬂint crescent from
Gesher: new insights into PPNA hafting technology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 37 (8),
2010–2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2010.03.006.
Shillito, L.M., Almond, M.J., Wicks, K., Marshall, L.J.R., Matthews, W., 2009. The use of
FT-IR as a screening technique for organic residue analysis of archaeological samples.
Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 72 (1), 120–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.saa.2008.08.016.
Skoog, D.A., Holler, F.J., Crouch, S.R., 2007. Principles of Instrumental Analysis. Vol. 6
Brooks/Cole (Cengage Learning), Belmont, MA.
Smith, Brian C., 2011. Fundamentals of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, Second
Edition. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Snoeck, C., Lee-Thorp, J.A., Schulting, R.J., 2014. From bone to ash: compositional and
structural changes in burned modern and archaeological bone. Palaeogeogr.
Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 416, 55–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.palaeo.2014.
08.002.
Solodenko, N., Zupancich, A., Cesaro, S.N., Marder, O., Lemorini, C., Barkai, R., 2015. Fat
residue and use-wear found on Acheulian biface and scraper associated with butchered elephant remains at the site of Revadim, Israel. Plos One 10 (3) (UNSP
e0118572-UNSP e0118572). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0118572.
Sponheimer, M., Alemseged, Z., Cerling, T.E., Grine, F.E., Kimbel, W.H., Leakey, M.G., ...
Wynn, J.G., 2013. Isotopic evidence of early hominin diets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110
(26), 10513–10518. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222579110.
Sponheimer, M., Lee-Thorp, J.A., 1999. Alteration of enamel carbonate environments
during fossilization. J. Archaeol. Sci. 26 (2), 143–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
jasc.1998.0293.
Stahlschmidt, M.C., Miller, C.E., Ligouis, B., Hambach, U., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., ...
Conard, N.J., 2015. On the evidence for human use and control of ﬁre at
Schoeningen. J. Hum. Evol. 89, 181–201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2015.

reﬂection (atr) mode. Archaeometry 55 (3), 507–532. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.
1475-4754.2012.00695.x.
Joseph, E., Prati, S., Sciutto, G., Ioele, M., Santopadre, P., Mazzeo, R., 2010. Performance
evaluation of mapping and linear imaging FTIR microspectroscopy for the characterisation of paint cross sections. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 396 (2), 899–910. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s00216-009-3269-8.
Karkanas, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2000. Diagenesis in prehistoric
caves: the use of minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the archaeological record. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27 (10), 915–929. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
jasc/1999.0506.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.-P., Simek, J.F., Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., 2002. Ash bones and
guano: a study of the minerals and phytoliths. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29, 721–732. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2001.0742.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A., ...
Stiner, M.C., 2007. Evidence for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the lower
Paleolithic: site-formation processes at Qesem cave, Israel. J. Hum. Evol. 53 (2),
197–212. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2007.04.002.
Lee-Thorp, J.A., Van der Merwe, N., Brain, C.K., 1994. Diet of Australopithecus robustus
at Swartkrans from stable carbon isotopic analysis. J. Hum. Evol. 27, 361–372.
Lettieri, M., 2017. Infrared spectroscopic characterization of residues on archaeological
pottery through diﬀerent spectra acquisition modes. Vib. Spectrosc. 76, 48–54.
Mallol, C., Cabanes, D., Baena, J., 2010. Microstratigraphy and diagenesis at the upper
Pleistocene site of Esquilleu cave (Cantabria, Spain). Quat. Int. 214 (1–2), 70–81.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2009.10.018.
Mallol, C., Hernández, C.M., Cabanes, D., Sistiaga, A., Machado, J., Rodríguez, Ágata, ...
Galván, B., 2013. The black layer of middle Palaeolithic combustion structures.
Interpretation and archaeostratigraphic implications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (5),
2515–2537. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.09.017.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F.W., Wood, B.M., Porter, C.C., 2007. Earth, wind, and ﬁre: ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34 (12), 2035–2052. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2007.02.002.
Mallol, C., Mentzer, S.M., 2015. Contacts under the lens: perspectives on the role of
microstratigraphy in archaeological research. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 1–25. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12520-015-0288-6.
Mallol, C., Mentzer, S.M., Wrinn, P.J., 2009. A micromorphological and mineralogical
study of site formation processes at the late Pleistocene site of Obi-Rakhmat,
Uzbekistan. Geoarchaeology 24 (5), 548–575. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/gea.20280.
Maniatis, Y., Tsirtsoni, Z., 2002. Characterization of a black residue in a decorated
Neolithic pot from Dikili Tash, Greece: an unexpected result. Archaeometry 44,
229–239. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1475-4754.t01-1-00055.
Mentzer, Susan M., 2014. Microarchaeological Approaches to the Identiﬁcation and
Interpretation of Combustion Features in Prehistoric Archaeological Sites. J.
Archaeol. Method Theory 21, 616–668.
Mercier, N., Valladas, H., Falguères, C., Shao, Q., Gopher, A., Barkai, R., ... Reyss, J.-L.,
2013. New datings of Amudian layers at Qesem cave (Israel): results of TL applied to
burnt ﬂints and ESR/U-series to teeth. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (7), 3011–3020. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.03.002.
Miliani, C., Rosi, F., Daveri, A., Brunetti, B.G., 2012. Reﬂection infrared spectroscopy for
the non-invasive in situ study of artists' pigments. Appl. Phys. A Mater. Sci. Process.
106 (2), 295–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00339-011-6708-2.
Miller, C.E., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2013. Geoarchaeological investigations at Diepkloof
rock shelter, western cape, South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (9), 3432–3452. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.02.014.
Monnier, G., Frahm, E., Luo, B., Missal, K., 2017. Developing FTIR microspectroscopy for
analysis of plant residues on stone tools. J. Archaeol. Sci. 78, 158–178. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.12.004.
Monnier G., Frahm E., Luo B. and Missal K., Developing FTIR microspectroscopy for the
analysis of animal-tissue residues on stone tools, J. Archaeol. Method Theory,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-017-9325-3. (in press,).
Monnier, G.F., Hauck, T.C., Feinberg, J.M., Luo, B., Le Tensorer, J.-M., al Sakhel, H.,
2013. A multi-analytical methodology of lithic residue analysis applied to Paleolithic
tools from Hummal, Syria. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (10), 3722–3739. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jas.2013.03.018.
Morley, M.W., Goldberg, P., Sutikna, T., Tocheri, M.W., Prinsloo, L.C., Jatmiko, X., ...
Roberts, R.G., 2016. Initial micromorphological results from Liang Bua, Flores
(Indonesia): site formation processes and hominin activities at the type locality of
Homo ﬂoresiensis. J. Archaeol. Sci. 77, 125–142. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.
2016.06.004.
Munro, L.E., Longstaﬀe, F.J., White, C.D., 2007. Burning and boiling of modern deer
bone: eﬀects on crystallinity and oxygen isotope composition of bioapatite phosphate. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 249, 90–102. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.palaeo.2007.01.011.
Namdar, D., Zukerman, A., Maeir, A.M., Katz, J.C., Cabanes, D., Trueman, C., ... Weiner,
S., 2011. The 9th century BCE destruction layer at tell es-Saﬁ/Gath, Israel: integrating
macro- and microarchaeology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 38 (12), 3471–3482. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jas.2011.08.009.
Pavia, D., Lampman, G., G. K., 2001. Introduction to Spectroscopy: A Guide for Students
of Organic Chemistry (Third). Harcourt College Publishers, Fort Worth, TX.
Poduska, K.M., Regev, L., Boaretto, E., Addadi, L., Weiner, S., Kronik, L., Curtarolo, S.,
2011. Decoupling local disorder and optical eﬀects in infrared spectra: diﬀerentiating
between calcites with diﬀerent origins. Adv. Mater. 23 (4), 550–554. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/adma.201003890.
Prati, S., Sciutto, G., Bonacini, I., Mazzeo, R., 2016. New frontiers in application of FTIR
microscopy for characterization of cultural heritage materials. Top. Curr. Chem. 374
(3), 26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s41061-016-0025-3.
Prinsloo, L.C., Wadley, L., Lombard, M., 2014. Infrared reﬂectance spectroscopy as an
analytical technique for the study of residues on stone tools: potential and challenges.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 41, 732–739. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.10.011.
Rebollo, N.R., Cohen-Ofri, I., Popovitz-Biro, R., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., Goldberg, P.,
Weiner, S., Boaretto, E., 2008. Structural Characterization of Charcoal Exposed to

822

Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 18 (2018) 806–823

G.F. Monnier

04.004.
Stathopoulou, E.T., Psycharis, V., Chryssikos, G.D., Gionis, V., Theodorou, G., 2008. Bone
diagenesis: new data from infrared spectroscopy and X-ray diﬀraction. Palaeogeogr.
Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 266 (3), 168–174. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.palaeo.
2008.03.022.
Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S.L., Surovell, T.A., Goldberg, P., Meignen, L., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef,
O., 2001. Bone preservation in Hayonim cave (Israel): a macroscopic and mineralogical study. J. Archaeol. Sci. 28, 643–659. https://doi.org/10.1006.
Stiner, M., Kuhn, S., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1995. Diﬀerential burning, recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. J. Archaeol. 22, 223–237. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1006/jasc.1995.0024.
Surovell, T.a., Stiner, M.C., 2001. Standardizing infra-red measures of bone mineral
crystallinity: an experimental approach. J. Archaeol. Sci. 28 (June), 633–642. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2000.0633.
Termine, J.D., Posner, A.S., 1966. Infrared analysis of rat bone: age dependency of
amorphous and crystalline mineral fractions. Science 153 (3743), 1523–1525. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.153.3743.1523.
Thieme, H., 1997. Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature 385,
807–810.
Thieme, H., 2007. Die Schöninger Speere - Mensch und Jagd vor 400 000 Jahren. TheissVerlag, Stuttgard.
Thompson, T.J.U., Gauthier, M., Islam, M., 2009. The application of a new method of
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy to the analysis of burned bone. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 36 (3), 910–914. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2008.11.013.
Toﬀolo, M.B., Boaretto, E., 2014. Nucleation of aragonite upon carbonation of calcium
oxide and calcium hydroxide at ambient temperatures and pressures: a new indicator
of ﬁre-related human activities. J. Archaeol. Sci. 49 (1), 237–248. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jas.2014.05.020.
Toﬀolo, M.B., Regev, L., Mintz, E., Poduska, K.M., Shahack-Gross, R., Berthold, C., ...
Boaretto, E., 2017. Accurate radiocarbon dating of archaeological ash using pyrogenic aragonite. Radiocarbon 59 (1). http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/RDC.2017.7.
Trueman, C.N.G., Behrensmeyer, A.K., Tuross, N., Weiner, S., 2004. Mineralogical and
compositional changes in bones exposed on soil surfaces in Amboseli national park,
Kenya: diagenetic mechanisms and the role of sediment pore ﬂuids. J. Archaeol. Sci.
31 (8), 721–739. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2003.11.003.
Trueman, C.N., Privat, K., Field, J., 2008. Why do crystallinity values fail to predict the
extent of diagenetic alteration of bone mineral? Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol.

Palaeoecol. 266 (3–4), 160–167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.palaeo.2008.03.038.
Vagnini, M., Miliani, C., Cartechini, L., Rocchi, P., Brunetti, B.G., Sgamellotti, A., 2009.
FT-NIR spectroscopy for non-invasive identiﬁcation of natural polymers and resins in
easel paintings. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 395 (7), 2107–2118. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s00216-009-3145-6.
Vandenabeele, P., Donais, M.K., 2016. Mobile spectroscopic instrumentation in archaeometry research. Appl. Spectrosc. 70, 27–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0003702815611063.
Weiner, S., 2010. Microarchaeology: Beyond the Visible Archaeological Record.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1990. States of preservation of bones from prehistoric sites in
the near east: a survey. J. Archaeol. Sci. 17 (2), 187–196. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0305-4403(90)90058-D.
Weiner, S., Brumfeld, V., Marder, O., Barzilai, O., 2015. Heating of ﬂint debitage from
upper Palaeolithic contexts at Manot cave, Israel: changes in atomic organization due
to heating using infrared spectroscopy. J. Archaeol. Sci. 54, 45–53. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jas.2014.11.023.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1993. Bone preservation in Kebara cave, Israel
using on-site Fourier transform infrared spectrometry. J. Archaeol. Sci. 20, 613–627.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2002. Three-dimensional distribution of minerals
in the sediments of Hayonim cave, Israel: diagenetic processes and archaeological
implications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29, 1289–1308. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2001.
0790.
Weiner, S., Xu, Q., Goldberg, P., Liu, J., Bar-Yosef, O., 1998. Evidence for the use of ﬁre at
Zhoukoudian, China. Science 281 (July), 251–253.
Wrangham, R., 2009. Catching Fire: How Cooking Made us Human. Basic Books, New
York.
Wright, L.E., Schwarcz, H.P., 1996. Infrared and isotopic evidence for diagenesis of bone
apatite at Dos Pilas, Guatemala: palaeodietary implications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 23 (6),
933–944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jasc.1996.0087.
Yizhaq, M., Mintz, G., Cohen, I., Khalaily, H., Weiner, S., Boaretto, E., 2005. Quality
controlled radiocarbon dating of bones and charcoal from the early pre-pottery
neolithic b (ppnb) of Motza (Israel). Radiocarbon 47, 193–206.
Zupancich, A., Nunziante-Cesaro, S., Blasco, R., Rosell, J., Cristiani, E., Venditti, F., ...
Gopher, A., 2016. Early evidence of stone tool use in bone working activities at
Qesem cave, Israel. Sci. Rep. 6 (October), 37686. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
srep37686.

823

