Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jaa

Are we missing the ‘‘sweet spot” between optimality theory and niche
construction theory in archaeology?
Mary C. Stiner ⇑, Steven L. Kuhn
School of Anthropology, P.O. Box 210030, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0030, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 12 January 2016
Revision received 2 June 2016
Available online 20 July 2016
Keywords:
Niche construction
Behavioral ecology
Co-evolution
Optimality models
Domestication
Village emergence
Paleolithic residential camps
Fire technology
Human evolution

a b s t r a c t
Proximate decision models, such as those derived from optimal foraging theory (OFT), are important tools
for predicting individual behavior and identifying contradictions to our assumptions. The models are
effective for exposing anomalies because they play upon basic resource needs and costs in situations
where human behavior cannot be observed directly. These decision models are not enough, however,
to account for the larger processes by which repeated interactions change the nature of co-evolving species, including humans, and alterations of the conditions of selection across generations. At least two
levels of mechanics and their respective temporal domains must be recognized in co-evolutionary studies. These are the primary mechanics of day-to-day decisions and actions, and the compounding mechanics of emergent phenomena that may affect the evolutionary history of populations. Local rules and goals
generally govern decisions of individuals or small groups of individuals as they try to balance competing
needs. Compounding rules govern emergence of larger phenomena which unfold unpredictably for generations to come. Contra some recent claims, one family of theory cannot replace the function of the
other; rather they are complimentary, by speaking to very different scales of phenomena. We develop
these points through a consideration of both primary and compounding dynamics in two distinct evolutionary forums: the developmental evolution of the hearth-centered residential camp in the Middle
Pleistocene and the ‘‘domestic-selective” environment of a formative village at the beginning of the
Holocene.
Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Optimal foraging theory (OFT) and related concepts from
behavioral ecology are by now well established in anthropology,
thanks in large part to the work of Jim O’Connell, his colleagues
and students. The best OFT studies are those that expose behavioral anomalies, departures from the predictions of a well-parsed
model (e.g., Barlow and Metcalfe, 1996; Bright et al., 2002;
Broughton, 1994; Buonasera, 2015; Gremillion et al., 2014;
Hawkes et al., 1982; Kuhn, 1994; Lupo, 2007; O’Connell et al.,
1988; Stiner, 2001; Ugan et al., 2003; Winterhalder and Smith,
2000). It is the very simplicity of narrowly framed, rigorous models
that allows anthropologists to winnow-out false assumptions and
to identify the dominant currencies and organizational features
of human behavior within and across cultures.

⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: mstiner@email.arizona.edu (M.C. Stiner), skuhn@email.arizona.edu (S.L. Kuhn).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2016.07.006
0278-4165/Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Generative evolutionary theories, including Co-evolution
Theory and Evolutionary Developmental Theory (EvoDevo),1 are
well established in the biological sciences. They have a much more
limited history of application in anthropology. Evolutionary Developmental Theory is gaining traction recently due to anthropologists’
growing motivation to address complex problems such as dynamic
networks and webs of social interaction. Of the many variants of
EvoDevo, the concept of Niche Construction (Odling-Smee et al.,
2003) is the one most widely discussed by archaeologists (e.g.,
Smith, 2011; O’Brien and Laland, 2012). One may wonder why
archaeologists were not quicker to take up niche construction

1
For our purposes, co-evolution and developmental theories fall under the same
general rubric, simply because they deal with generative phenomena (physical and/or
behavioral) that arise from interaction and create selective conditions that are
heritable. We introduce them as separate terms initially in recognition of differences
that are important to specific applications. What the two areas of theory share in
common is a potential for ‘‘plastic” modulation of form or behavior as the result of
repeated reciprocal or feedback across generations. That the interactions may be
among living organisms or between organisms and a mutable environment are
important but secondary distinctions.

178

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

theory (NCT), as it seems exceptionally well suited to holistic studies of human beings and their environment. In particular, NCT
places a strong emphasis on a dynamic heritable environment (similar to ecosystem engineering, Jones et al., 1997), and humans create
artificial environments around themselves as a rule. One obstacle
may be the difficulty of really testing NCT in modern contexts
(see Odling-Smee et al., 2013; Matthews et al., 2014), much more
so in archaeological and paleontological studies of past processes.
Another important stumbling block that has surfaced in recent literature, and the one we will address in this paper, is the belief that the
different sorts of theory named above exist on single plane of utility
and are thus in conflict at the ontological level (Smith, 2011; Zeder,
2012). We argue that this is not the case, and that it is high time to
consider the conceptual and operational relations between OFT and
NCT in particular (see also Bliege Bird, 2015; Gremillion et al.,
2014).
Some background to EvoDevo is important to the argument we
present here. Laubichler and Maienschein (2007) trace Evo-Devo
thinking to 19th century notions of ‘‘generative” process in evolutionary biology. Rooted in early ideas of organismic development,
the theoretical potential of generative process was pursued mainly
within the confines of embryology, the study of the developing
individual (Laubichler and Maienschein, 2007). The generative
paradigm has been overshadowed in most other areas of life
science by the great successes of classic (Darwinian) evolutionary
theory. Today, generative refers to how interactions among a set
of finite rules yield unanticipated behaviors or other surprising
outcomes. It is difficult or impossible to predict such outcomes
using simple human brain-power, but computer simulation modeling shows that they can be a consequence of simple rules (e.g.,
Andersson et al., 2014; Barton et al., in press; Ullah et al., 2015).
The unforeseen patterns that emerge can be physiological, social
and/or cognitive in nature, and thus would seem to be very relevant to research on human evolution.
An overload of data and nagging gaps in evolutionary explanation have given new urgency to integrating development and
evolution in the biological and social sciences. Refinements in
co-evolution and EvoDevo theory have been part of this recent
trend. The idea of co-evolution from the 1960–1970s (e.g.,
MacArthur and Levins, 1967) focused on how the interactions
among living organisms may disproportionately shape and constrain the evolutionary pathways of one or both taxa by altering
the conditions of selection. Niche construction differs from classic
co-evolution theory in that it focuses on co-evolution of the
organism and its environment, which may also alter the conditions of selection over the long run (Odling-Smee et al., 2003;
Laland et al., 2000).
Interaction and ‘‘inter-activeness” are central conditions to all
EvoDevo and Co-evolutionary theories. Whether the linkages arise
from random historical processes or structural basins of attraction,
it is the dynamic of interaction that moves the evolutionary processes along. The interactions may be intense or diffuse, but there
must be repeated cycles of action and reaction (feedback influences) to produce an evolutive effect.
Much of what we shall consider in this essay concerns the necessary relationships between two distinct levels of theory for arc
haeology—optimality-based decision models and niche construction, a type of evolutionary developmental theory. First we will
lay out what we see as some key logical relations between optimal
foraging theory (OFT) and niche construction theory (NCT). We will
then illustrate our argument using two archaeological examples of
very different ages: (a) the emergence of hearth-focused residential camps during the Middle Pleistocene in Eurasia; and, (b) the
birth of the village among early sedentary foragers in Central Anatolia at the beginning of the Holocene.

2. Functional hierarchy in theory
To study human evolution in the broad sense is, more often
than not, to study co-evolution—the co-evolution of biology and
culture, predator and prey, parasite and host, human and domesticate, technology and body. Humans are an exceptionally manipulative species, and their influence on other organisms and the
physical environment is everywhere to be seen. Humans are not
altogether unique for being manipulative, but they hold an
extreme status in natural systems. Aspects of the foragerproducer transition, including constructed environments and risk
management practices, as well as the links between stockkeeping and zoonotic diseases, are common examples of feedbacks
that have promoted co-evolution. The human-constructed environment has become part of the arena of selective influences in
our evolution.
The fact that humans get caught up in intense interactive spirals
of all sorts begs explanation, yet seems to lie beyond what much
current theory can accommodate. We have seen that close interactions between humans and animals, or between humans and
plants, can push the evolutionary process in unprecedented directions, often quite rapidly. But how does it work? And how do
immediate constraints and day-to-day behaviors participate in
locking people into reciprocal evolutionary pathways with other
species and things?
Co-evolution models vary in the specific mechanics of change.
Some early ones viewed the process as largely independent of
the physical environment such as Van Valen’s (1973) Red Queen
hypothesis. The tendency to interact brings on selective behavioral
constraints that span generations, such as in the case of competition (e.g., Schoener, 1974, 1983). Other, more recent models
emphasize how biotic interactions cumulatively alter the selective
physical environment for future generations, a proposition that is
essential to keystone species effects and niche construction alike
(compare Jones et al., 1997; Brown and Heske, 1990; Laland
et al., 2000). By modifying the sources of selection in the heritable
environment, highly ‘‘interactive” species are said to co-direct their
evolution mainly through positive feedback loops. The pros of their
actions must generally outweigh the cons (though the cons can be
significant), and the organisms must be flexible enough to keep
adjusting to the changes wrought by the interactions. The modifying activities must persist over multiple generations in order to
have a directional effect in evolution, either through Darwinian
natural selection (Laland et al., 2000) or some neutral processes
(e.g., Lansing and Cox, 2011).
The ‘co-evolvants’ experience directional selection not simply
because they are locked in an intense relationship but also because
their interactions alter the conditions of life for their descendants.
While the term ‘environment’ often implies physical surroundings,
social and inter-specific interaction can also be important parts of
the selective environment. Importantly, repeated feedback will
provoke a host of new challenges that must also be solved in some
way (Tainter, 1988). The spiraling nature of feedback relations may
eventually lock the species into new states of existence, making it
very difficult to retreat to earlier states (Andersson et al., 2014).
The big picture emerges from small dynamics. Herein lies the
key to integrating the different levels of theory, such as between
OFT and NCT. There is the matter of short-term intentional or
goal-directed decisions, and there is the matter of the structures
that emerge and ultimately envelop the selection process. The
short-term goals and constraints that motivate people are of fundamental importance to archaeology. These models play upon
basic resource needs and costs that humans cannot ignore while
balancing the checkbook of life. Because archaeologists cannot
observe prehistoric behaviors directly, assumptions about basic

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

energy and time budgets supply a much-needed foundation for
predicting common agent decisions and learning when and where
they do not apply. Constraining factors are often the main topic of
investigation when using optimality models.
Optimality models are not enough, of course, to account for the
larger processes by which repeated interactions change the conditions of selection across generations. Thus we must recognize at
least two levels of mechanics and their respective time-space
domains in co-evolutionary (including NCT) studies. There is the
question of what happens day to day on the ground (primary
mechanics) and there is the question of larger-scale emergent phenomena that affect the populations across generations (compounding mechanics). Local rules generally govern individual decisions;
the agents are goal-driven in fulfilling and balancing competing
needs. A very different set of rules govern emergent phenomena
which unfold as they will over larger scales and create conditions
that may be inescapable for generations to come.

3. Swinging and missing
Niche construction theory, the brainchild of John Odling-Smee
(1988; Odling-Smee et al., 2003), has attracted the attention of
many anthropologists recently. The behavioral flexibility afforded
by culture enables humans to engage in niche construction to an
unprecedented degree. Indeed, classic forms of human-animal
and human-plant co-evolution are accompanied by niche construction (e.g. Smith, 2011; O’Brien and Laland, 2012). Yet some
recent statements about the supremacy of NCT over behavioral
ecology seem misdirected (see Smith, 2015; Zeder, 2012). Granted,
there are isolated statements in the primary NCT literature—that
non-NCT models view adaptation as a one-way process (e.g.,
Laland et al., 2000). Though hardly the central thesis of the biological papers on NCT, the claim has generated unnecessary confusion
about the relations between co-evolution models and basic economic ones. We can probably chalk this up to competitive branding, since all co-evolutionary processes invoke feedback
mechanisms. The espoused contest between human behavioral
ecology (HBE) and NCT raised by Zeder (2012) is nothing more
than a red herring (Broughton et al., 2010). Such misapprehensions
on the part of archaeologists can do us a service, however, in
exposing a functional hierarchy between co-evolutionary theories
and theories that deal with the primary goal-driven actions of
agents. The fact that many of the empirical patterns that attract
NCT thinkers come from research based on simpler models, such
as those from behavioral ecology, testifies to the potentially complementary relations between these distinct levels of theory. HBE
and NCT simply aren’t functional replacements of one another.
A related and equally dubious claim about the power of NCT
concerns the role of human intentionality in guiding long-term
change (Zeder, 2012). Generative change occurs on too large a time
scale to be anticipated by the agency of individuals (Stiner and
Feeley-Harnik, 2011). Meeting short-term goals in human-animal
and human-plant interactions would have been partly or wholly
deliberate, both for culture-bearing humans and the partner species. But the unintended consequences that are niche construction
and co-evolution unfold from these interactions over long periods
and at multiple spatial and demographic scales. These larger outcomes are in fact unpredictable.
What can we say about the long term value of behavioral ecology approaches, such as those championed over several decades by
Jim O’Connell and many others? The key point is that NCT must be
integrated hierarchically with simple decision models, such as
from OFT, if archaeological applications are ever to get off the
ground. OFT considers the proximate, conscious decisions of individuals based on the needs of survival and reproduction. NCT

179

addresses the emergent dynamics generated by interactions
between individuals following economic agendas, the species
interacted with, and the abiotic and biotic environments that supported all the players. The challenge for archaeologists is to document the causative spiral of interactions that generate complexity,
including novel solutions to emerging problems, which in turn
generate new problems that also must be solved.

4. The rise of the hearth-centered residential camp in the
Paleolithic
Simple innovations in food processing have had transformative
effects on the architecture of the human face, digestive system, and
systems of cooperative labor. Arguably these conditions, aided by
the existence of fire places in particular, also created new selective
environments for hominin social interaction. The habit of processing certain foods at central or safe places emerged very early in
human evolution, well before we have robust evidence for the regular use fireplaces. Transport of food and artifacts for the purposes
of processing was a footing upon which other, more derived behaviors could evolve. This historical precedent therefore is central to
modeling and investigating some fundamental ideas about niche
constructing processes in the Pleistocene. It is integral, for example, to the development of the hearth-centered base camp, which
had fully emerged by the Middle Paleolithic period (Kuhn, 2012;
Kuhn and Hovers, 2013; Rolland, 2004).
Pleistocene hominins’ decisions about food transport and processing were no doubt guided first by objectives centering on the
ability to raise the value of collected or hunted foods. This is where
optimality models have been especially valuable in archaeological
research—modeling and testing the motivations for moving food in
terms of balancing the costs of food transport and the gains from
additional, intensive processing. We can show that marrow extraction and near-bone tissue removal were practiced based on information about the body parts of prey most often carried to safe
places, after primary butchery in the field. Later in prehistory bone
and meat processing took place at camps and was enhanced with
the aid of fire (see below).
These actions were spurred by the physical and social motivations of individuals. Regular transport of food to processing hubs
nonetheless came to affect nearly every corner of human existence,
by creating a unique interaction bubble where a variety of social
and economic feedback processes could operate over hundreds of
thousands of years. Regardless of hominins’ intentions when carrying food to a reliable heat source, for example, it would have been
very difficult to avoid sharing meat with whomever was present at
the destination. This is where the theoretical domain of niche construction has great analytical value for archaeologists. The emergence of hearths as reliable and nearly universal facilities in
camps set distinct premiums on the ability to defer foraging benefits, cooperate in foraging and other labor (Stiner et al., 2011), and
pool the energetic gains from cooking food (Carmody and
Wrangham, 2009).
The ramifications of fire technology and central place foraging
developed over millennia. Hominins began using fire long before
it became widespread. The earliest well accepted case for use of
fire dates to nearly 800,000 years ago at Gesher Benot Ya’akov on
the upper Jordan river (Goren-Inbar et al., 2004). However, evidence of fire use is quite sporadic until around 400,000 years ago
(e.g., Karkanas et al., 2007; Shimelmitz et al., 2014), and evidence
for fire does not become ubiquitous until about 250,000 years
ago (Roebroeks and Villa, 2011; Rolland, 2004). Early rare cases
of fire in archaeological sites therefore seem to represent instances
of invention, whereas the increasing incidence across sites and
regions clearly represents the main period of innovation

180

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

(Maclaurin, 1953; Marchetti, 1980), that is the widespread development and adoption of a reliable and well controlled technology.
The interval between 500,000 and 250,000 years ago roughly
coincides with the final, rapid phase of hominin brain expansion.
The neocortex or forebrain--the area of the human brain that plays
a large part in planning, logic, emotional control, among other
advanced cognitive functions--enlarged the most (Rightmire,
2003). Robin Dunbar’s (2003) social brain hypothesis poses an
explicit model of the mechanics of cognitive selection in a constrained social space that a reliable heat source may create. Building upon the Theory of Mind, Dunbar considers how ecological and
physical problems could often be solved through new modes of
cooperation. Social solutions require more elaborate networks
built on empathy and an ability to model the intentions of other
individuals. The mental processes he proposes would put heavy
demands on the neocortex area, or executive functions, of the
human brain. For Richard Wrangham and others (e.g., Wrangham
and Carmody, 2010), fire technology is also key. Fire was simultaneously a means for extracting energy from food and the environment more efficiently and an artificial forum that pulled the
possibilities for social evolution onto a new path. As such, fire
became both an aid and an anchor in social networking and cooperation (Gamble, 1999; Gowlett, 2006).
To return to the main theme of this paper, fire-centered camps
resulted in an intense selective environment that was bound foremost by its energetic efficiency, in spite of what initially would
have been rising social costs (having to share more than expected,
for example). The basic processing benefits and other physical
advantages of hearths outweighed the new social constraints
imposed within this unprecedented interaction space. One can
expect social roles and contracts to restructure rapidly under these
conditions. Thus, in considering the theoretical and analytical relations between optimality in foraging and niche construction, we
must not lose sight of what pulled individuals to these places again
and again. Specific and acute considerations of cost and benefit set
by the nutritional properties of animal tissues, food-getting technology, and the need for shelter motivated individuals to start
gathering around fires. There is no need to imagine that they anticipated the long-term effects of this practice, revolutionary as they
were.
To demonstrate niche constructing effects one needs evidence
of cyclical feedback pathways between hominin behavior and the
emergent social spaces on an evolutionary time scale. This cannot
be achieved without some appeal to basic economic behaviors. In
the absence of direct behavioral observations, modeling and testing expectations seems the best way to proceed. One line of evidence for niche construction effects can be found in contrasting
modes of hearth-centered meat eating between the late Lower
Paleolithic and the early Middle Paleolithic periods in the Levant.
All cases involved transport of selected ungulate body parts to cave
sites for further processing, and all sites present evidence of fireplaces (e.g., Meignen et al., 1989, 2006, 2010; Karkanas et al.,
2007; Stiner, 2005; Stiner et al., 2011). We may therefore assume
that the basal motivation of food processing was common to all
cases. At the late Lower Paleolithic site of Qesem Cave (Gopher
et al., 2005), butchering activities involved a limited range of tasks,
mainly simple de-fleshing and marrow extraction. These activities
were very clearly oriented to hearths and many of the processing
tasks were assisted by fire (Stiner et al., 2009, 2011). The tool
marks and their anatomical placements on meat-bearing ungulate
bones are redundant, quite heavy-handed and focused almost
exclusively on cutting actions. When cut marks occur in patches
on limb shafts, the orientations are more chaotic than is typical
in Middle Paleolithic cave sites studied by the same methods. In
fact the cut mark patterns of both the Middle and early Upper Paleolithic comparators exhibit significantly greater regularity (statis-

tically) in the orientations of cut marks over small areas of bone.
The more diverse orientations of cut marks on prey bones from
Qesem Cave suggest that hominin butchering postures, or the ways
of holding a body part while cutting away the meat, varied a great
deal. Comparable data from Middle Paleolithic and early Upper
Paleolithic sites from the Levant and elsewhere instead generally
exhibit a more ‘‘surgical” quality, with careful use of tools and
much consistency in postures (Stiner et al., 2009, 2011).
Among recent humans, butchering of large animals tends to
involve a chain of focused tasks performed by one or a few persons,
and it tends to result in well aligned marks on bone surfaces. These
observations have social significance in that butchering procedures
guide many of the formalities of food distribution and sharing that
follow. We therefore may be seeing evidence of a simpler or less
evolutionarily derived pattern of meat consumption around
hearths during the late Lower Paleolithic that was social, but less
socially canalized than those typical of Middle Paleolithic and later
humans. Lesser motor coordination seems not to be the explanation for the contrast, given the skillful tool manufacturing abilities
of late Lower Paleolithic hominins (Barkai et al., 2005). The evidence for procedural interruptions or diverse positions while cutting flesh at Qesem Cave might instead reflect more hands
(including less experienced hands) removing meat from any given
limb bone, rather than receiving shares through the butchering
work of one skilled person. The feeding pattern from shared
resources at Qesem Cave thus appears to have been more individualized than in the Middle and later Paleolithic, with limited or no
formal ‘‘apportioning” of meat. If the tendencies noted at Qesem
Cave for tool mark patterns prove to be widespread, the data
may expose subtle but potentially important differences in the
practical and social mechanics of meat sharing in a constrained
social space between the late Lower Paleolithic and the Middle
Paleolithic.

5. The birth of village life at the end of the Pleistocene
Early villages sprang from a newly sedentary lifestyle and
strong commitment to plant cultivation in the Middle East. As critical as these initial conditions were for setting new constraints on
human social and economic activities, they did not determine the
specific paths that village evolution followed. Developmental histories vary considerably across the Middle East.
Villages were the product of many complex interactions
between social constraints, incipient animal and crop management, structural adjustments, waste accumulation, and other factors. The benefits and problems that arose in one corner of
human existence frequently nudged other domains, forcing or
favoring reorganization of social space and technology, and the
reverse. It is normal for humans to solve new problems by resorting to a domain of culture where the cost of switching or innovation is lower, to preserve an important advantage in another
domain. This situation results in offset feedback loops that inadvertently lever humans into altered states of existence.
Asßıklı Höyük (AH) in Central Anatolia, Turkey, is well suited for
studying interactive processes of village development at a fine scale
because of its precocious history of animal management and agriculture, deep stratigraphy, and extraordinary preservation. AH is
the earliest known early Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN) settlement in
Central Anatolia (Duru, 2002, 2013; Esin and Harmankaya, 1999;
Özbasßaran, 1998; Özbasßaran and Duru, in press). Its mounded
anthropogenic deposits span more than 1500 years of continuous
occupation that began around 10,500 cal BP (Quade et al.,
submitted for publication; Stiner et al., 2014).
The relations between individual human decisions and niche
construction can be explored from diverse viewpoints at AH, but

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

here we will focus on human-animal interactions to trace probable
feed-back effects between humans and the built environment in
the contexts of (a) meat storage practices, (b) caprine management,
and (c) animal commensalism. The plant record of AH is also very
rich, but fewer data are available for discussion as yet.
Architectural designs at AH underwent a remarkable evolution
in less than 1000 years (Duru, 2002, 2013; Özbasßaran, 1998;
Özbasßaran and Duru, in press). The dominant structures of the earliest occupations were circular or oval and made of wattle-anddaub over a reed and wood skeleton. Architectural designs soon
shifted to rounded semi-subterranean mud-brick structures,
accompanied by informal wooden surface structures. The earliest
structures were relatively porous to traffic. They were separated
from one another by substantial outdoor spaces where many different activities were carried out daily. The walls rose less than a
meter above the ground surface, with most of the interior insulated
by the sediment. Later circular buildings had moderately taller
walls of mud-brick. Residential structures culminated in densely
packed rectangular mud-brick buildings constructed at ground
level, with mud-brick walls up to 2 m high and entrances through
the roof rather than through the sides of each building (Duru, 2002,
2013; Özbasßaran, 1998). The majority of daily activities within the
village likewise moved from the ground surface alongside the
buildings to the tops of elevated buildings. What remained of
ground-level open spaces by the later period were a small number
of formal passages the weaved among rectangular buildings and
which led out to shared middens.
Three of the most obvious changes in village architecture therefore are increasing above-ground wall height, building shape from
rounded to rectangular, and open to densely packed layouts. Building height increased rapidly over just a few centuries, well before
densely packed rectangular designs came into use. The fact that
building walls quickly rose out of the ground, without any substantial change in the internal ceiling height of buildings, suggests new
problems of keeping certain things out of the interiors and off the
roofs.
5.1. Meat storage
Food storage is widely evidenced in Epi-Paleolithic and Mesolithic hunter-gatherer sites (Testart, 1982). The emphasis was on
plant mast in some instances and more on animal parts in others.
Yet many late Pleistocene and early Holocene people laid some
food away for future use. Food storage practices underwent further
changes and intensified with neolithization (Kuijt, 2009). At the
level of individual decision making, early food storage efforts must
initially have been motivated by a desire to increase food security
though lean times of year. Food storage behavior nonetheless has
larger social ramifications in that it can alter control or rights of
access to an out-of-season resource. Sharing rules and sharing
pools may also be affected, particularly if individual economic
decisions become less constrained or ‘‘entangled” by the decisions
of others in the community (Stephens and Krebs, 1986: 7). Scholars
have proposed a variety of motivations for food storage, ranging
from attempts to control food risk to individual quests for social
power (Hayden, 2009; Kuijt, 2009; Testart, 1982). What matters
most for this discussion is the fact that food hoarding restructures
the food supply, pitching more of peoples’ effort to the social and
physical demands of protecting and preserving the concentrated
resource. Parts of deceased organisms or those in a dormant state
are the common foci of food storage world-wide, but live animals
can also be stored.
The AH community was dedicated to plant cultivation (including
early domesticated einkorn wheat [Van Zeist and Jan De Roller,
2003]) on the Melendiz floodplain from the start. Because gardens
require vigilant protection from plant predators, living amongst

181

the gardens on the upper floodplain would have been necessary.
Hunting in areas around the permanent settlement under these circumstances would depress local wild ungulate populations. Depletion of game could occur regardless of whether climate was
benevolent or harsh, simply because the consumer population was
concentrated at one location and tethered to productive gardens.
Snow cover and harsh winds would have been major impediments
to long-distance hunting in winter (January-April, based on recent
conditions), particularly in the surrounding uplands. This situation
would place new premiums on meat and fat storage of any sort.
The rise in caprine exploitation almost certainly was about
maintaining reliable access to meat throughout the year; secondary products (milk, wool) become important somewhat later
in the Neolithic (Buitenhuis, 1997; Greenfield, 1989; Helmer
et al., 2007; Halstead and Isaakidou, 2013; Stiner et al., 2014). Several kinds of storage are possible in the case of caprines, including
drying or smoking cuts of meat, rendering fat, and live-storage of
animals. Storage of rendered animal fat at AH is very likely, given
the abundance of stone-boiling facilities there. However the bulk
of stored meat would have been in the form of live captive animals.
Early management, in other words, was a highly flexible if smallscale method for growing and live-storing meat and fat. The food
transport costs and related risks were reduced by growing some
animals on site, redirecting some of humans’ energy to feeding
(storing fodder for) and protecting the captive animals. Live storage bridged the meat supply through winter (Stiner et al.,
submitted for publication). Such storage also introduced new complexities to the design and ‘‘life cycles” of structures, labor and
social entitlements for human generations to come.
5.2. Caprine management
The early PPN residents of AH practiced a simple variant of
caprine management (Stiner et al., 2014). Sheep were the main target of management but some goats were also kept during all periods. The human-caprine relationship was an evolving mutualism, a
classic form of co-evolution. Humans gained access to a more
secure meat source, and the caprines obtained food and possibly
a higher reproductive output under the umbrella of human protection. It is significant that sheep were the main subject of early
management at AH. Located within the natural range of wild
sheep, the species was a staple prey item since the time the village
was founded. This fact provides one line of evidence for an in-situ
evolution rather than importation of management strategies from
another region. The emphasis on caprines increased rapidly over
the following centuries (ca. from 50% to 90% caprines, based on
skeletal specimen counts, Stiner et al., 2014), with corresponding
declines in the use of small game and other wild ungulate species.
Sheep body size declined gradually and continuously, and this
trend is accompanied by refinements and possibly standardization
in management strategies (Buitenhuis et al., submitted for
publication). Management ultimately resulted in domesticated
caprines by the late the PPN, but the AH story unfolds well before
true domestication of sheep or goats. Earliest co-dependency
between caprines and humans is evidenced at AH by in-situ dung
accumulations between the buildings, indicating that animals were
stabled (Mentzer, submitted for publication), and zooarchaeological data on caprine age and sex structure indicate some degree of
human-imposed selection (Stiner et al., 2014). There are also spatial indications of the distinct economic status of caprines in relation to other prey animals. Caprine bones are more equably
distributed both inside and outside of buildings, and across the site
as a whole, than are the bones of other ungulate species. Caprines
supplied the meat that everyone ate most of the time, whereas the
distributions of other animal remains are much more idiosyncratic
(Stiner et al., submitted for publication).

182

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

Early architectural changes suggest that incipient caprine management forced the re-design of wall heights and social and workrelated spaces within the community. Initially caprines were stationed in very small numbers and scattered across the settlement.
Later, they were kept in greater numbers in one or a few larger
enclosures at the edge of the village. The early, rapid increase in
above-ground wall heights was likely a response to the destructive
trampling and climbing habits of goats and early varieties of sheep,
which can destroy mud-plastered surfaces in a matter of minutes
or hours. It is more difficult to claim feedback effects between
the increasing density of structures on the mound and caprines
management. There is a clear connection, however, between refuse
build-up, which accelerated with time, and recycling of animal
waste. Captive ungulates can fill an area with dung in a remarkably
short time. At AH, dung was transformed from the status of raw
waste to a binder for construction. It also became an important
alternative to increasingly scarce wood fuel (Mentzer, 2013; Mentzer, n.d.). While dung was employed in these ways from the earliest period of occupation, its many uses grew disproportionately in
scope and importance.
The early village environment was a mixture of natural and
human-made structural elements—natural floodplain sediments,
gathered clay, reeds and wood. One thousand years later, the village was an entirely human-made construction composed of
imported and recycled mud, reeds and wood, and large amounts
of dung. The later constructions simply could not exist in the
absence of the animal waste of which they were made. The village
went from having a open breezy layout and limited privacy to a
highly insulated, dense arrangement with very private interiors.
This increasingly artificial physical environment exerted its own
selective influences on residents, shielding from them from natural
elements while concentrating other irritants around them (smoke,
dust, pests, pathogens). One can be sure that many of the observed
structural modifications also hold information about shifting social
relations and boundaries within the community, even if our views
on the subject are more speculative.
5.3. Commensals
Many of the behavioral and structural adjustments that humans
made in the service of their own needs at AH created microenvironments and resource concentrations for small vertebrates
and invertebrates. The maze of structures within the settlement
and alterations of the land at its margins were particularly attractive to mice (Apodemus spp.), dwarf hamsters (Cricetulus, especially
C. migratorius), green toads (Bufo viridis), and hedgehogs (Erinaceaus concolor).
Toads and hedgehogs may have gained food, shelter, and possibly a reproductive advantage, without harming the human residents. These relations could have verged toward mutualism in
that toads and hedgehogs feed on insects and other invertebrates
in refuse piles. Near exclusion of these animals in the later phases
of occupation (Bailey, 2016) was more likely have been caused
incidentally by habitat loss within the settlement as waste management intensified and architectural in-filling proceeded.
Most of the rodent bones at AH are found inside structures,
indicating that they were attracted specifically to sheltered conditions (Bailey, 2016; Stiner et al., submitted for publication). Mice
(Apodemus spp.) and dwarf hamsters (Cricetulus, especially C.
migratorius) dominate the rodent fauna, and both genera tend to
invade human-built structures. These rodents bring no benefits
to humans, and a small number of mice can easily spoil large
amounts of stored seeds and other plant foods. The residents of
AH may not have been affected much by rodent-borne diseases,
given the early dates of the settlement, but burgeoning synan-

thropic relations may have set the stage for new trajectories of disease evolution (McFarlane et al., 2012).
The relative frequency of mouse and hamster bones (and preserved coprolites) is highest in the earliest occupations, when
structures were made of more porous materials and separated by
substantial outdoor spaces. The later structures were composed
mainly of thick mudbrick walls and plasters, and each residential
structure had one small sealable room. Some of these architectural
changes seem to have been better for keeping rodents away from
dry-stored foods.
In summary, people erected buildings and other facilities at AH
in a very deliberate manner. The village domestic environment was
built cumulatively through a multitude of individual decisions
spanning hours, days or years. However, the village entity was
arguably an emergent property of the cultural system and one that
reciprocally influenced the evolution of the community. The
increasingly artificial physical environment of the village grew
unpredictably and brought on novel selective conditions for its
inhabitants. Problem-solution feedbacks related to keeping livestock, waste accumulation, and plant storage, for example, mutually levered changes in living space design.
6. Conclusions
The dawn of hearth-centered residential camps in the Middle
Pleistocene and early sedentary villages at the beginning of the
Holocene exemplify the emergent nature of complex human selection environments. These are examples of how small-scale behaviors may lead to unanticipated selective effects across generations.
Anthropologists may need to re-consider the working relations
between the theories of niche construction (and other coevolutionary dynamics) and behavioral ecology in order to understand how these phenomena have come about. Most recent claims
that niche construction is fundamental to changes in human
behavior are both too general and too post hoc to provide genuinely new insights. And the claim that foraging theory and niche
construction are antithetical is just wrong, and counter-productive
to boot. Integrating research on niche construction in humans with
testable individual (agent) decision models really can provide us
with some of the tools we desperately need for understanding
complex co-evolutionary processes.
Anthropologists frequently get caught up in debates about the
inherent ‘‘rightness” of certain theories. Yet the only thing that is
right about any theoretical viewpoint is its utility for answering
(rather than accommodating) important questions. It seems clear
that all theoretical tools have limitations for testing ideas and
building knowledge. It is worthwhile, therefore, to consider how
distinct scalar and mechanical properties of seemingly different
kinds of theory can lead to a much more powerful toolkit for studying the past. The logical and analytical relations between OFT and
NCT represent one important example.
The practical challenge of the niche-construction agenda is documenting and testing clear propositions about the cyclical spiral of
stimulus and response in cultural sequences. Research must begin
from a careful consideration of the dominant currencies and choice
principles in play. Currencies can vary tremendously and not all are
archaeologically accessible, but fortunately the choice principles
tend to fall into just a few major domains: maximization, risk minimization and variance minimization (Stephens and Krebs, 1986).
Balancing cost and gain has occupied much of HBE modeling
efforts, whereas the choice principle of stability probably needs
more attention, particularly with regard to human strategies for
controlling environmental variation (e.g., storage, insulation
technologies). A related element of stability in a choice principle
concerns the potential scope of cooperation within groups. Accord-

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

ing to J. Maynard Smith (1982, cited in Stephens and Krebs, 1986:
7), situations in which payoffs of a decision co-depend on the decisions made by other individuals make stability the best choice
principle to follow.
Many of the agent decisions upon which complex cultural systems develop and change are about balancing the inputs and outputs of life under a given set of circumstances. We can continue to
benefit from a rich and growing legacy of behavioral ecology
research on food transport, processing and storage, central place
foraging, technology and raw material trade-offs, and prey choice.
These kinds of studies help us tease out some of the microdynamics that underpin the grand niche constructing processes
in human evolution. Life certainly is more complex than any optimizing model assumes, but these simple models will continue to
provide us with some important building blocks for unpacking
the complexities of dynamic human systems.
Acknowledgments
We take this opportunity thank Karen Lupo and Brian Codding
for organizing a very stimulating SAA session of which this paper
was one contribution. We are deeply grateful to them and to Jim
O’Connell, John Odling-Smee, Kevin Laland, and Claes Andersson
for many stimulating conversations that have led up to this essay.
Thanks also to two anonymous JAA reviewers for their helpful
comments and criticisms.
References
Andersson, C., Törnberg, A., Törnberg, P., 2014. An evolutionary developmental
approach to cultural evolution. Curr. Anthropol. 55 (2), 154–174.
Bailey, K.S., 2016. The Microfauna Assemblages of Asßikli Höyük; Invasive Taxa in an
Early Village Sequence in Central Anatolia Unpublished MA Thesis. School of
Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
Barkai, R., Gopher, A., Shimelmitz, R., 2005. Middle Pleistocene blade production in
the Levant: an Amudian assemblage from Qesem cave, Israel. Eur. Prehist. 3,
39–74.
Barlow, R.K., Metcalfe, D., 1996. Plant utility indices: two Great Basin examples. J.
Archaeol. Sci. 23 (3), 351–371.
Barton, C.M., Ullah, I.I.T., Bergin, S.M., Sarjoughian, H.S., Mayer, G.R., BernabeuAuban, J.E., Heimsath, A.M., Acevedo, M.F., Riel-Salvatore, J.G., Arrowsmith, J.R.,
2016. Experimental socioecology: integrative science for anthropocene
landscape dynamics. Anthropocene (in press).
Bliege Bird, R.L., 2015. Disturbance, complexity, scale: new approaches to the study
of human-environment interactions. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 44, 241–257.
Bright, J., Ugan, A., Hunsaker, L., 2002. The effect of handling time on subsistence
technology. World Archaeol. 34 (1), 164–181.
Broughton, J.M., 1994. Declines in mammalian foraging efficiency during the Late
Holocene, San Francisco Bay, California. J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 13, 371–401.
Broughton, J.M., Cannon, M.D., Bartelink, E.J., 2010. Evolutionary ecology, resource
depression, and niche construction theory: applications to central California
hunter-gatherers and Mimbres-Mogollon agriculturalists. J. Archaeol. Method
Theory 17 (4), 371–421.
Brown, J.H., Heske, E.J., 1990. Control of a desert-grassland transition by a keystone
rodent guild. Science 250 (4988), 1705–1707.
Buitenhuis, H., 1997. Asßıklı Höyük: a protodomestication site. Anthropozoologica
25–26, 655–662.
Buitenhuis, H., Peters, J., Pöllath, N., Stiner, M.C., Munro, N.D., Saritasß, Ö., 2016. Asßikli
Höyük: the faunal remains from levels 2 and 3: changes towards full
domestication. In: Ozbasaranm, M., Duru, G. (Eds.), The Early PPN
Occupations of Asıklı Höyük in Central Anatolia, Essays in Honor of Ufuk Esin,
Ege Press, Istanbul (submitted for publication).
Buonasera, T.Y., 2015. Modeling the costs and benefits of manufacturing expedient
milling tools. J. Archaeol. Sci. 57, 335–344.
Carmody, R.N., Wrangham, R.W., 2009. The energetic significance of cooking. J.
Hum. Evol. 57, 379–391.
Dunbar, R.I.M., 2003. The social brain: mind, language, and society in evolutionary
perspective. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 32, 163–181.
Duru, G., 2002. Architectural indications for the origins of Neolithic Central
Anatolia. In: Gerard, F., Thissen, L. (Eds.), The Neolithic of Central Anatolia,
CANeW International Table Ronde. Ege Yayınları, Istanbul, pp. 171–180.
Duru, G., 2013. Tarihöncesinde insan-mekan, topluluk-yerlesßme ilisßkisi: Mö 9. bin
solu -7. bin basßı, Asßıklı and Akarçay Tepe [Human-space, CommunitySettlement: 9–7th mil BC Asßıklı and Akarçaytepe] Unpublished PhD
Dissertation. Department of Prehistory, Istanbul University, Istanbul.

183

Esin, U., Harmankaya, S., 1999. Asßıklı, neolithic in Turkey, the cradle of civilisation.
In: Özdoğan, M., Basßgelen, N. (Eds.), Neolithic in Turkey. Arkeoloji ve Sanat,
Istanbul, pp. 115–132.
Gamble, C.S., 1999. The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Gopher, A., Barkai, R., Shimelmitz, R., Khalaily, M., Lemorini, C., Heshkovitz, I., Stiner,
M.C., 2005. Qesem Cave: an Amudian site in central Israel. J. Israel Prehistory
Soc. 35, 69–92.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M.E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., Ben-Nun, A.,
Werker, E., 2004. Evidence of Hominid control of fire at Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov,
Israel. Science 304, L725–L727.
Gowlett, J.A.J., 2006. The early settlement of northern Europe: fire history in the
context of climate change and the social brain. C.R. Palevol 5, 299–310.
Greenfield, H.J., 1989. Zooarchaeology and aspects of the secondary products
revolution: a Central Balkan perspective. Zooarchaeologia 3 (1–2), 191–200.
Gremillion, K.J., Barton, L., Piperno, D.R., 2014. Particularism and the retreat from
theory in the archaeology of agricultural origins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111 (17),
6171–6177.
Halstead, P., Isaakidou, V., 2013. Early stock-keeping in Greece. In: Colledge, S.,
Conolly, J., Dobney, K., Manning, K., Shennan, S. (Eds.), The Origins and Spread of
Domestic Animals in Southwest Asia and Europe. Left Coast Press, Walnut
Creek, CA, pp. 129–144.
Hawkes, K., Hill, K., O’Connell, J.F., 1982. Why hunters gather: optimal foraging and
the Ache of eastern Paraguay. Am. Ethnol. 9 (2), 379–398.
Hayden, B., 2009. The proof is in the pudding: feasting and the origins of
domestication. Curr. Anthropol. 50 (5), 597–601.
Helmer, D., Gourichon, L., Vila, E., 2007. The development of the exploitation of
products from Capra and Ovis (meat, milk, and fleece) from the PPNB to the
Early Bronze Age in the northern Near East (8700–9200 cal BP).
Anthropozoologica 42 (2), 41–69.
Jones, C.G., Lawton, J.H., Shachak, M., 1997. Positive and negative effects of
organisms as physical ecosystem engineers. Ecology 78, 1946–1957.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A.,
Gopher, A., Stiner, M.C., 2007. Evidence for habitual use of fire at the end of the
Lower Paleolithic: site formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Hum. Evol.
53 (2), 197–212.
Kuhn, S.L., 1994. A formal approach to the design and assembly of mobile toolkits.
Am. Antiq. 59 (2), 426–442.
Kuhn, S.L., 2012. Emergent patterns of creativity and innovation in early
technologies. In: Elias (Ed.), Origins of Human Innovation and Creativity.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 69–88.
Kuhn, S.L., Hovers, E., 2013. Alternative pathways to complexity: evolutionary
trajectories in the Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age. Curr. Anthropol. 54
(S8), S176–S182.
Kuijt, I., 2009. What do we really know about food storage, surplus, and feasting in
preagricultural communities? Curr. Anthropol. 50 (5), 641–644.
Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, J., Feldman, M.W., 2000. Niche constructions, biological
evolution, and cultural change. Behav. Brain Sci. 23, 131–175.
Lansing, J.S., Cox, M., 2011. The domain of the replicators: selection, neutrality, and
cultural evolution. Curr. Anthropol. 52 (1), 1–22.
Laubichler, M.D., Maienschein, J., 2007. Embryos, cells, genes, and organisms:
reflections on the history of evolutionary developmental biology. In: Sansom, R.,
Brandon, R.N. (Eds.), Integrating Evolution and Development, From Theory to
Practice. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 1–24.
Lupo, K.D., 2007. Evolutionary foraging models in zooarchaeological analysis: recent
applications and future challenges. J. Archaeol. Res. 15 (2), 143–189.
MacArthur, R.H., Levins, R., 1967. The limiting similarity, convergence, and
divergence of coexisting species. Am. Natural. 101, 377–385.
Maclaurin, W.R., 1953. The sequence from invention to innovation and its relation
to economic growth. Quart. J. Econ. 67 (1), 97–111.
Marchetti, C., 1980. Society as a learning system: discovery, invention, and
innovation cycles revisited. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 18 (4), 267–282.
Matthews, B., De Meester, L., Jones, C.G., Ibelings, B.W., Bouma, T.J., Nuutinen, V.,
van de Koppel, J., Odling-Smee, H., 2014. Under niche construction: an
operational bridge between ecology, evolution, and ecosystem science. Ecol.
Monogr. 84 (2), 245–263.
McFarlane, R., Sleigh, A., McMichael, T., 2012. Synanthropy of wild mammals as a
determinant of emerging infectious diseases in the Asian-Australasian region.
EcoHealth 9 (1), 24–35.
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., 1989. Les structures de combustion
moustériennes de la grotte de Kébara (Mont Carmel, Israël). In: Olvie, M.,
Taborin, Y. (Eds.), Nature et Fonctions des Foyers Prehistoriques. Memoires du
Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France, vol. 2. APRAIF, Nemours, pp. 141–146.
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S.L., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2010.
Apport des analyses minéralogiques (en spectrométrie infrarouge à transformée
de fourier) à l’interprétation des structures anthropiques: Les concentrations
osseuses dans les niveaux Moustériens des Grottes de Kébara et Hayonim
(Israël) Dec. PALEO Dec. Suppl. 3, 93–107.
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Speth, J.D., Stiner, M.C., 2006. Middle Paleolithic
settlement patterns in the Levant. In: Hovers, E., Kuhn, S.L. (Eds.), Transitions
before the Transition: Evolution and Stability in the Middle Paleolithic and
Middle Stone Age. Springer, New York, pp. 149–169.
Mentzer, S.M., 2013. Microarchaeological approaches to the identification and
interpretation of combustion features in prehistoric archaeological sites. J.
Archaeol. Method Theory 21 (3), 616–668.

184

M.C. Stiner, S.L. Kuhn / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 44 (2016) 177–184

Mentzer, S.M., 2016. Micromorphology of level 4 structures, Trench 4GH, Asıklı
Höyük, (2008–2012 field seasons). In: Ozbasaranm, M., Duru, G. (Eds.), The
Early PPN Occupations of Asıklı Höyük in Central Anatolia, Essays in Honor of
Ufuk Esin, Ege Press, Istanbul (submitted for publication).
O’Brien, M.J., Laland, K.N., 2012. Genes, culture, and agriculture: an example of
human niche construction. Curr. Anthropol. 53 (4), 434–470.
O’Connell, J.F., Hawkes, K., Blurton Jones, N., 1988. Hadza hunting, butchering, and bone
transport and their archaeological implications. J. Anthropol. Res. 44, 113–161.
Odling-Smee, F.J., 1988. Niche constructing phenotypes. In: Plotkin, H.C. (Ed.), The
Role of Behavior in Evolution. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 73–132.
Odling-Smee, F.J., Erwin, D.H., Palkovacs, E.P., Feldman, M.W., Laland, K.N., 2013.
Niche construction theory: a practical guide for ecologists. Q. Rev. Biol. 88 (1),
3–28.
Odling-Smee, F.J., Laland, K.N., Feldman, M.W., 2003. Niche Construction: The
Neglected Process in Evolution. Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 37.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Özbasßaran, M., 1998. The heart of a house: the hearth, Asßıklı Höyük, a pre-pottery
neolithic site in Central Anatolia. In: Arsebük, G., Mellink, M.J., Schirmer, W.
(Eds.), Light on Top of the Black Hill: Studies Presented to Halet Çambel Ege
Yayinlari, Istanbul, pp. 555–566.
Özbasßaran, M., Duru, G., 2016. The Early Sedentary Community of Cappadocia:
Asßıklı Höyük. Troisièmes Rencontres d’Archéologie de l’IFEA, CappadociaNovember 2013 (in press).
Quade, J., Stiner, M.C., Copeland, A., Clark, A.E., Özbasßaran, M., 2016. Summary of
carbon-14 dating at Asßıklı Höyük. In: Ozbasaranm, M., Duru, G. (Eds.), The Early
PPN Occupations of Asıklı Höyük in Central Anatolia, Essays in Honor of Ufuk
Esin, Ege Press, Istanbul (submitted for publication).
Rightmire, G.P., 2003. Brain size and encephalization in early to Mid-Pleistocene
Homo. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 124 (2), 109–123.
Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of fire in
Europe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 5209–5214.
Rolland, N., 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic fire a punctuated
event? A review of the Middle Pleistocene record in Eurasia. Asian Perspect. 43,
248–280.
Schoener, T.W., 1974. Resource partitioning in ecological communities. Science 185,
27–39.
Schoener, T.W., 1983. Field experiments on inter-specific competition. Am. Nat.
122, 240–285.
Shimelmitz, R., Kuhn, S.L., Jelinek, A.J., Ronen, A., Clark, A.E., Weinstein-Evron, M.,
2014. ‘Fire at will’: the emergence of habitual fire use 350,000 years ago. J. Hum.
Evol. 77 (2014), 196–203.
Smith, B.D., 2011. General patterns of niche construction and the management of
‘wild’ plant and animal resources by small-scale pre-industrial societies. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 366 (1566), 836–848.
Smith, B.D., 2015. A comparison of niche construction theory and diet breadth
models as explanatory frameworks for the initial domestication of plants and
animals. J. Archaeol. Res. (2015), 1–48

Stephens, D.W., Krebs, J.R., 1986. Foraging Theory. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Stiner, M.C., 2001. Thirty years on the ‘‘broad spectrum revolution” and paleolithic
demography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98 (13), 6993–6996.
Stiner, M.C., 2005. The Faunas of Hayonim Cave, Israel: A 200,000-Year Record of
Paleolithic Diet, Demography, and Society. Peabody Museum of Archaeology
and Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge.
Stiner, M.C., Barkai, R., Gopher, A., 2009. Cooperative hunting and meat sharing
400–200 kya at Qesem Cave, Israel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106 (32), 13207–
13212.
Stiner, M.C., Barkai, R., Gopher, A., 2011. Hearth-side socioeconomics, hunting and
paleoecology during the late Lower Paleolithic at Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Hum.
Evol. 60 (2), 213–233.
Stiner, M.C., Buitenhuis, H., Duru, G., Kuhn, S.L., Mentzer, S.M., Munro, N.D., Pöllath,
N., Quade, J., Tsartsidou, G., Özbasßaran, M., 2014. A forager-herder trade off,
from broad-spectrum hunting to sheep management at Asßıklı Höyük, Turkey.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111 (23), 8404–8409.
Stiner, M.C., Feeley-Harnik, G., 2011. Energy and ecosystems. In: Shryock, A., Smail,
D.L. (Eds.), Deep History: The Architecture of Past and Present. University of
California Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 78–102.
Stiner, M.C., Munro, N.D., Cristidou, R., 2016. Zooarchaeological evidence on humananimal interactions within the early PPN (level 4) settlement at Asßıklı Höyük.
In: Ozbasaran, M., Duru, G. (Eds.), The Early PPN Occupations of Asıklı Höyük in
Central Anatolia, Essays in Honor of Ufuk Esin, Ege Press, Istanbul (submitted
for publication).
Tainter, J.A., 1988. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Testart, A., 1982. The significance of food storage among hunter-gatherers:
residence patterns, population densities, and social inequalities. Curr.
Anthropol. 23 (5), 523–537.
Ugan, A., Bright, J., Rogers, A., 2003. When is technology worth the trouble? J.
Archaeol. Sci. 30 (10), 1315–1329.
Ullah, I.I.T., Kuijt, I., Freeman, J., 2015. Toward a theory of punctuated subsistence
change. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 9579–9584.
Van Valen, L., 1973. A new evolutionary law. Evol. Theory 1, 1–30.
Van Zeist, W., Jan De Roller, G., 2003. Some notes on the plant husbandary of Asßıklı
Höyük. In: Van Zeist, W. (Ed.), Reports on Archaeobotanical Studies in the Old
World, Groningen, pp. 115–142.
Winterhalder, B., Smith, E.A., 2000. Analyzing adaptive strategies: human
behavioral ecology at twenty-five. Evol. Anthropol. 9 (2), 51–72.
Wrangham, R.W., Carmody, R.N., 2010. Human adaptation to the control of fire.
Evol. Anthropol. 19, 187–199.
Zeder, M., 2012. The broad spectrum revolution at 40: resource diversity,
intensification, and an alternative to optimal foraging explanations. J.
Anthropol. Archaeol. 31, 241–264.

