Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Late Neolithic household activities in marginal areas: the
micromorphological evidence from the Kouveleiki caves,
Peloponnese, Greece
Panagiotis Karkanas
Ephoreia of Palaeoanthropology-Speleology of Southern Greece, Ardittou 34b, 11636 Athens, Greece
Received 26 October 2005; received in revised form 8 February 2006; accepted 27 February 2006

Abstract
The micromorphological study of the Neolithic archaeological sequence of the Kouveleiki Caves A and B and the reassessment of the archaeological record under the new data revealed that the site constituted a small-scale self-contained mixed farming household in an upland area
of Greece. The study of the microstructure and the microstratigraphy of the sediment revealed that the front chamber of Cave A is dominated by
dry, almost totally burnt coprolites resulting from stabling, most likely of sheep and/or goats. There are also indications of frequent trampling and
disturbance of the stabling deposits by human activities. Hence, Cave A was used as a small seasonal pen and, probably, as a place for rudimentary activities. The dark back chamber of Cave A was the main habitation area, where plastered floors were constructed by a mixture of
burnt dung (derived from the seasonal pen) and red clay (to be found in the plain in front of the cave). The nearby Kouveleiki Cave B was
probably used as a complementary activity area.
The case presented here offers some new insights into the issues associated with the increase in cave use during the Late Neolithic of Greece.
Ó 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ovicaprine stabling; Dung plastered floor; Late Neolithic; Cave; Micromorphology

1. Introduction
The use of space in occupied caves is not usually considered as segmented. It has been also suggested that caves provide ready-made natural structures that do not require any
significant adaptation of human behavior; in this way, they
may have been convenient, but they were not essential to cultural development [38]. During the Neolithic, when people are
found engaged in the economic use of caves, they are nearly
always pastoralists who are often nomadic [39]. Indeed, in
the majority of such cases, the caves lack evidence of domestic
occupation, and a specialized use by shepherds is assumed [5].
Nevertheless, in Arene Candide, Italy, layers of domestic occupation intervene with stabling layers. Although it is not clear

E-mail address: pkarkanas@hua.gr
0305-4403/$ - see front matter Ó 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2006.02.017

whether there was a partitioning in the use of space, the morphology and thickness of the deposits allowed the inferred
identification of a ‘fenced area’ [12,27,29].
Recent advances in the micromorphological and microscopic analysis of stabling layers opened a new dimension in
the interpretation of cave use. The micromorphological study
of undisturbed blocks of stabling sediment can sometimes differentiate between animal species and possibly food sources
and grazing processes on the basis of differences in the nature
of the components and the structure and arrangement of dung
[1,11: pp. 113e115; 12,29,30,32]. Detailed studies in Arene
Candide [12,29], as well as other Italian caves [4,5], made possible the modeling of site use and the reconstruction of the
formation of the different deposit facies. Post-depositionally
altered dung deposits can also be identified on the basis of microstructural and mineralogical modifications of the sediment
[14,37]. In addition, the microscopic analysis of bulk samples

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

has shown that certain types of microscopic crystals of
calcium salt, the so called spherulites, are associated mostly
with herbivore dung [6,8e10].
In Greece, during the late Neolithic a widespread human
use of caves is attested, particularly in agriculturally marginal
areas [13,17,40]. Although the most frequent interpretation of
the function of these caves considers them as seasonal bases
for mobile herders, the data fit equally well with the hypothesis of an expansion of mixed farming communities into areas
with caves [17]. On the other hand, a variety of other purposes
is suggested for their use, including ritual and storage
[13,36,40]. In some cases, interpretation is partially based on
zooarchaeological evidence [15,16,18], but direct evidence
of animal stabling (like in situ dung accumulation) is lacking
(but see ref. [6] for Kitsos Cave).
The late Neolithic Kouveleiki Caves [19,22,23] provide
a good opportunity to study the old problem of the intensive
use of caves in Greece, this time using contextual sedimentological analysis, i.e. micromorphology. The site actually
comprises two cave complexes very close to each other. Kouveleiki A is a two-chamber cave, a fact that raises the possibility of using the natural segmentation for differential space use.
In the context of the possibilities offered by the new tools of
analysis associated with micromorphology, the Kouveleiki
Caves provide an apposite case for answering questions
related to the general nature of cave occupation, their

1629

monofunctional or polyfunctional use, the differences in space
use, and the seasonality of their occupation. Moreover, given
the location of the cave complex in a relatively infertile upland
area, the answers to these questions will shed new light to the
issue of Late Neolithic-Early Bronze Age increase of upland
occupation in Greece.
2. Geomorphological and archaeological framework
Kouveleiki Caves A and B are two caves located on the
cliffs of a shallow valley at the eastern boundaries of Eurotas
basin between the villages of Alepochori and Geraki, southern
Peloponnese (Figs. 1 and 2). The caves overlook the Vrontamas plain, which expands to the southwestern of Parnon
Mountain. They are formed at the contact between underlying
metamorphosed volcanic rocks and overlying dolomitic
limestones.
The Vrontamas plain consists mainly of infertile indurated
conglomerates of Pleistocene age that give way in the south, in
the areas of Myrtea (Fig. 1), to marls, sandstones, and mudstones of the same age. This geological boundary, which separates the elevated plain of Vrontamas (mean height 200 m)
from the coastal plain southern of Myrtea, was considered in
the past as the northernmost boundary of prehistoric occupation of any significance [3]. Indeed, even today, the Vrontamas
plain is cultivated only by using heavy machinery for

Fig. 1. Geographical setting of the Kouveleikei caves in Evrotas valley. The inset shows the location of the caves in southern Greece.

1630

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

Fig. 2. The location of the two caves (with arrows) on the limestone cliffs of a shallow valley. The bottom of the valley consists of soft altered volcanic rocks. In the
near front, the infertile plain of Vrontamas is visible.

loosening the soil and supporting the growth of the nondemanding olive tree. Nevertheless, along the contacts between
the limestone foothills and the conglomeratic plain, there is
a thin strip of basic metamorphic rocks where shallow valleys
are formed filled with alluvial deposits, usually in areas no
more that a few hectares (Fig. 2). The fields of these valleys
are fertile and are cultivated for a variety of crops [19].
Kouveleiki A is divided into two chambers by several huge
blocks collapsed from the cave roof (Fig. 3). The most recent
collapse postdates the archaeological sequence of the site. The

first, external and luminous, chamber has a surface area of ca.
25 m2, but before the recent collapse, the surface area of the
front chamber would have been about 50 m2. The internal
dark chamber is about 150 m2 and preserves stalagmitic and
stalactitic columns of considerable size along a most likely
first major collapse; the evidence suggests that the rear chamber has always been dark and that this is not the result of the
recent collapse (Fig. 3).
Kouveleiki B is a few tens of meters alongside to Cave A
(Fig. 2). It consists of one chamber with a surface area of

Fig. 3. Plan view of Kouvekeiki Cave A (left) and Cave B (right) with the locations of sampling (AS, AN, AMW, AME, B). Dashed lines mark the drip lines and
dotted line the opening in the roof in Kouveleiki B. Kouveleiki A: 1 ¼ pre-Neolithic collapsed limestone block, 2 ¼ post-Neolithic collapse, 3 ¼ curved limestone
block, 4 ¼ stone wall, 5,6 ¼ speleothems.

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

about 150 m2 (Fig. 3). A large opening in the roof has caused
considerable erosion of the archaeological sequence of the
cave. Only patches of sediment are found along the cave
walls, close to the entrance, and at the back edge. Due to its
good size and spacious shape Kouveleiki B was used until
recently as a pen.
Both chambers of Kouveleiki Cave A preserve an archaeological sequence 1e1.5 m thick (Table 1), spanning Late to
Final Neolithic period (ca. 5300 to 3900 cal BCE). A series
of C-14 dates overlap in both chambers. Kouveleiki B,
although mostly of overlapping age, has a younger sequence
(4600e3900 cal BCE.). In both caves domestic pottery for

1631

household activities was found, but Kouveleiki A has also uncovered fine painted pottery [21,24]. Kouveleiki A is very rich
in other archaeological findings including obsidian, chert, and
quartz tools and debitage, polished axes, spindle whirls, clay
and marble figurines, and grinders [22]. The findings of Kouveleiki B are dominated mostly by lithic debitage [23].
In light of the above evidence it becomes apparent that
there are some differences in the composition of the cultural
material between the two caves, with Kouveleiki A being
more rich in items both of utilitarian and symbolic use. In contrast, the two chambers of Kouveleiki A do not show any systematic differences.

Table 1
List of thin section according to area and stratigraphy

Cave A, external
chamber

Area/sampling style

Layer

Thickness

Thin section

Northwestern area
(below AS1 continuous sampling).

AS1

25 cm

Not studied

AS2
AS3
AS4
AS5
AS6
AS7
AS8
AS9
AN1

7 cm
15 cm
11 cm
8 cm
5 cm
6 cm
7 cm
Bedrock
85 cm

KVA1a, KVA1b
KVA1b, KVA1c, KVA2a
KVA2a, KVA2b, KVA3a
KVA3a, KVA3b
KVA3b, KVA4a
KVA4a, KVA4b
KVA4b, KVA4c
KVA4c
KV1a, KV1b, KV1c

AN2
AN3

12 cm
23 cm

AN4
AN5
CF: clay
feature
AME1

11 cm
12 cm
10 cm

KV1c, KV2a
KV2a, KV2b, KV2c, KV3a,
KV3b
KV3b, KV3c, KV4a
KV4a, KV4b KV4c
KV5

25 cm

Not studied

AME2
AME3
AME4
AME5
AME6
AME7
AME8
AME9
AME10

12 cm
9 cm
4 cm
8 cm
13 cm
12 cm
8 cm
8 cm
28 cm

AME11
AMW1

19 cm
30 cm

Not studied
Not studied
Not studied
Not studied
KV31a, KV31b
KV31b, KV32
KV32, KV33
KV33, KV34a
KV34a, KV34b, KV34c,
KV35a
KV35a, KV35b
Not studied

AMW2
AMW3
AMW4
AMW5
B2
B3
B4
B1
B3
TR1
TR2
TR3

8 cm
4 cm
27 cm
20 cm
40 cm
20
15 cm
20 cm
21 cm
30 cm
50 cm
15 cm

Not studied
KV36a
KV36b, KV36c, KV36d
Not studied
KV6a,
KV6a, KV6b, KV6c, KV7a
KV7a, KV7b
KVB1a, KVB1b, KVB1c
KVB2a, KVB2b
KV37
KV38
KV39

South, entrance area
(below upper 60 cm continuous sampling).

East wall.
Cave A, internal
chamber

Middle, east area
(below AME5 continuous sampling).

Middle, west area
(continuous sampling of AMW3 and AMW4).

Cave B

2.2e3.2, entrance area (continuous sampling).

3.2e3.3, entrance area (selective sampling).
Reference Soils

Mariorema Bridge.
Front Plain.
Lykorema Valley.

1632

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

3. Methodology
Excavated profiles preserving the maximum stratigraphic
variability were selected for sampling (Fig. 3). Continuous
systematic sampling was employed in most cases, in order
to detect all variation within the sections (Table 1). The top,
relatively disturbed, parts of the sequences were avoided.
Two areas with clay features were also selectively sampled.
For comparison, three samples from different red paleosols
in the area in front of the cave were collected (Table 1).
The sampled intact blocks of sediment were impregnated
with polyester resin under vacuum following the methodology
described by [35]. Both medium (50  40 mm: KVA and KVB
series in Table 1) and large format (75  50 mm) thin sections
were prepared. Some 15 medium and 34 large format thin sections were studied in total, using a stereomicroscope at magnifications of 5 to 40 and a polarizing microscope and incident
UV light microscope at magnifications ranging from 50 to
400. Thin sections were described according to [7] and
[11]. Mineralogical identifications were performed in selected
bulk samples using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
(FTIR) and X-ray diffraction.
4. Field description of the deposits
At the entrance of the first chamber of Kouveleiki A, a small
pile is formed by a brown stony colluvial material containing
some archaeological elements and silty grey diffuse lenses
(layers AN1e5, Table 2). Towards the interior and particularly
towards the northwest, adjacent to the entrance to the second
chamber, the sediment becomes gradually more fine-grained
and consists of loose ashy layers (layers AS1e9, Table 2;
Fig. 4). Both areas have been systematically sampled (Table 1).
The rest of the area is more disturbed, but the nature of the sediments does not differ from the rest of the cave, although they
tend to be more heterogeneous and stonier. Large discrete compact red clay masses of probably extraneous origin were found
scattered in the deposits.
In the interior chamber the sediments are more massive,
clayey and dark in colour (Table 2). They contain several
well-defined structures like stone and open hearths, clay platforms, and other stone arrangements that probably separated
the space. In parts of the sequence sharply defined horizontal
surfaces, made of dark coloured mud, were observed.
It is obvious that only part of the original stratigraphy of the
cave is preserved. It is most probable that some the deposits
were removed for cleaning and construction purposes (see
below). This is especially evident in the disturbed parts of
the deposits in the front chamber. Modern disturbance has
also contributed to it, as seen particularly in the inner chamber,
where clearly defined pits are filled with a chaotic mixture of
sediment and archaeological material from different periods,
even of modern times (layers AME1e5, Table 2).
Only remnants of the sedimentary sequence of Kouveleiki
B are preserved. Most of them are washed out of the cave
by rainwater entering through the fracture on the cave roof
(Fig. 3). However, the few remaining sediment patches,

attaining a maximum thickness of 1 m towards the entrance
of the cave (Tables 1 and 2), show partly overlapping range
of dates of occupation with Kouveleiki A. Thus, taking also
into account the shape and configuration of the cave, it is
not unreasonable to assume that they are representative of at
least the general nature of the former sedimentary sequence.
Large compact masses of extraneous red clay, similar to the
ones found in Cave A, were also identified (e.g. layer B3,
Table 2). An interesting construction resembling a shallow
drain channel was dug on the bedrock.

5. Micromorphological results
5.1. Kouveleiki A, external chamber
At a microscopic scale, the sediment in the front chamber is
heterogeneous sandy loam with complex microstructure.
Towards the entrance (Fig. 3; Table 1), there are layers very
rich in clastic components consisting of silty limestone, and
brownish loam attributed to colluvial processes (Table 2). In
the inner part (Figs. 3 and 4; Table 1), the deposits are more
grey and silty, composed predominantly of dung fragments
with signs of different degrees of burning (Fig. 5a). The coprolites were identified by their shape (subrounded surface),
compact nature, charred organic and phytolith content and
arrangement (occasionally convolute fabric), as well as by
the presence of calcium oxalate druses and spherulites [12].
The latter are mostly found in herbivore dung [6,9,10]; they
appear in the form of less than 20 microns spheres with a characteristic black cross under crossed polarizers. The totally
burnt dung fragments contain crystals of calcite with relict
plant shapes. The half-burnt fragments are dominated by
highly fragmented, purely combusted brownish organic matter.
Most of the identifiable phytoliths inside the dung fragments
are stem and husk phytoliths of cereals (identification on
thin section by G. Tsartsidou). In between the dung fragments,
there is a loose mixture of spherulites, oxalate druses, phytoliths, calcite pseudomorphs of calcium oxalate, wood charcoal
fragments, a few burnt bone fragments, some pottery fragments, and exotic red decalcified clay aggregates. The crude
alternation of dark grey and light grey layers is the result of
the different content of wood charcoal and, sometimes, of
half-burnt coprolite fragments that give a darker appearance
to the deposit (layers AS1e9, Table 2).
At the same interior profile it was possible to identify two
thin in situ combustion zones (Table 2, layers AS4 and AS7;
Fig. 5b). They consist of laminated mixture of wood ash crystals with relict plant shapes intermixed with some burnt dung
fragments. The wood ash crystals were intimately associated
with dicotyledonous leaf epidermis phytoliths (identification
on thin section by G. Tsartsidou) (Fig. 5b).
Some compacted horizons were observed above the combustion zones (Table 2, layers AS3, AS4 and AS5; Fig. 5c).
The compaction horizons have a clear-cut upper contact and
consist of an almost non-porous mixture of moderate homogenized burnt dung material with sub-horizontal fissuring

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

1633

Table 2
Summary of micromorphological observations and interpretations
Layer

Field description

Microscopic description

Interpretation

AS1

Brownish, loose, heterogeneous with
stones.
Light grey, loose ashy silty sand.

Not studied.

Modern disturbance.

Strongly bioturbated, granular wood ashes rich in dung
spherulites, oxalate druses, and phytoliths.
Upper 1 cm as above. Below there is a 5 cm moderately
bioturbated, loose deposit rich in spherulites, oxalate
druses, and phytoliths. Fine fragments of burnt
coprolites, pottery fragments, and red clay aggregates
present. Below there are 8 cm of compacted and
homogenised deposits rich in wood ash and charcoal
fragments; frequent spherulites, oxalate druses, and fine
fragments of ashed coprolites.
Upper 2 cm, bioturbated, loose, spherulite-rich deposits.
Below, with locally a sharp contact, there are compact
deposits rich in spherulites, oxalate druses, and fine
ashed coprolite fragments; massive structure and subhorizontal fissuring. Red clay aggregates, fine charcoal,
and pottery fragments present. Large charcoal
fragments are more frequent in the deposits below that
also a have a looser appearance. In the middle, there is
thin lens of undisturbed wood ashes.
2 cm of strongly bioturbated, charcoal-rich deposit. This
rests, through a sharp contact, on 1 cm of strongly
compacted material rich in spherulites, and oxalates;
massive structure and sub-horizontal fissuring. A 5 cm
moderate loose, charcoal-rich layer with abundant fine
ashed coprolite fragments is found below.
Moderately loose mixture of large and fine fragments of
ashed coprolites with husk and stem phytoliths of
cereals. The coprolites are dominated by spherulites and
oxalate druses.
1 cm of undisturbed wood ashes with leaf (epidermis)
phytoliths. Below there are black charred and ashed
coprolite fragments with husk and stem phytoliths of
cereals. Spherulites and oxalate druses dominant.
Large and fine fragments of ashed coprolites in a loose
mineralogenic groundmass.
Altered greenstone.
Bioturbated, homogenized, mineralogenic loam rich in
detrital calcite. Wood ash crystals, spherulites, and fine
ashed coprolite fragments present. A few calcititc
hypocoatings and red decalcified clay aggregates.
Same as above, but with more wood ash, charcoal
fragments, and spherulites.
Moderately heterogeneous and bioturbated
mineralogenic loam with some coarser horizons.
Frequent spherulites, oxalate druses, fine ashed
fragments of coprolites, and red decalcified clay
aggregates.
Same as above, but more nineralogenic, with coarser
increments; locally compacted.
1 cm of spherulite rich deposit with a lot of charred fine
plant fragments. Below there is coarse increment and
then 5 cm of moderately heterogeneous mineralogenic
deposits with spherulites and oxalate druses. A more
compacted deposit with the same components is found
below.
A mixture of red clay and calcareous material with
crystallitic b-fabric. Mica schist and quartzite fragments
present.
Not studied.
Not studied.
Not studied.

Biogenically disturbed,
probably stabling deposits.
Biogenically disturbed and
trampled burnt stabling
deposits.

AS2
AS3

A rock-line on the top. Compact,
whitish ashy silt with charcoal-rich
lenses at the bottom.

AS4

A stone-line on the top. Compact,
light grey, ashy silty sand with
charcoal-rich lenses.

AS5

Dark grey, ashy silty sand.

AS6

Light grey silt to sandy silt.

AS7

Dark grey, ashy silty sand with
pinkish white ash lenses close
to the top.

AS8

Brownish grey, ashy silty sand.

AS9
AN1

Greenstone.
Reddish brown, heterogeneous with
soil fragments and stones.

AN2

Grey, ashy loam

AN3

Brownish grey, ashy silty sand with
some stones.

AN4
AN5

Greenish grey loam with
some stones.
Dark grey loam.

CF

Bowl-like clay lining.

AME1
AME2
AME3

Dark brown stony loam.
Dark grey, same as above.
Brown pebbly loam.

Short gap in stabling with
trampling and some
biological reworking.

Short gap in stabling with
trampling and some
biological reworking.

Burnt stabling deposits.

Same as above.

Same as above.
Bedrock.
Bioturbated colluvial clastics
mixed with some burnt
stabling deposits.
Same as above.
Colluvial clastics mixed with
stabling deposits.

Same as above.
Same as above.

Clay structure.

Modern disturbance.
Same as above.
Same as above.
(continued on next page)

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

1634
Table 2 (continued )
Layer

Field description

Microscopic description

Interpretation

AME4
AME5
AME6

Dark brown loam.
Stony layer.
Grey brown loam with sharp upper
contact.

Same as above.
Same as above.
Plastered floors.

AME7

Same as above.

AME8

Grey loam with sharp upper contact.

AME9
AME10
AME11

Same as above.
Same as above, but more brownish.
Same as above

AMW1

Light brown silt to silt loam with
some stones.
Light brown loam with a lot of
stones.
Grey compact loam with scattered
charcoals and a reddish clay lens.

Not studied.
Not studied.
Three layers (each 3e5 cm thick), two of them with
sharp contacts. The upper layer consists of compact,
homogeneous loam consisting of spherulites, oxalate
druses, phytoliths, and clay. A few fine ashed coprolite
fragments are recognized. The lower layer has an upper
clay rich coating with a diffuse lower contact. It is more
clayey than the overlying layer. The lowest layer has
more spherulites; it is fragmented and moderately
bioturbated.
Mainly as above, but more fragmented and moderately
bioturbated. Contacts are not discerned, but there are
zones with more clay or spherulites. Some internal
slacking is observed.
Same as above, with some more dispersed charcoal
fragments.
Same as above.
Same as above.
Upper boundary relatively sharp with some clay-rich
areas. The rest of the material is like above, but with a
lot of clay patches with diffuse boundaries.
Not studied.

AMW2
AMW3

AMW4

Grey brownish, compact loam; in the
middle, a 2 cm layer of red clay with
sharp contacts.

AMW5
B1

Grey loam with scattered charcoals.
Reddish brown, sandy loam with fine
blocky peds.

B2
B3

Same as above with some stones.
Dark red clay mass with sharp
contacts.

B4

Greenish grey with scattered
charcoals.

TR1

Red clay with columnar peds.

TR2

Red silty clay with columnar peds.

TR3

Sandy loam with calcitic nodules.

Disturbed plastered floors.

Same as above.
Same as above.
Same as above.
Plastered floors.

Modern disturbance.

Not studied.

Same as above.

2 cm of compact, homogeneous loam with a sharp
upper contact, rich in spherulites, oxalates, phytoliths,
and clay. The lower part is more fragmented and
moderately bioturbated.
Upper 7 cm as above, but fragmented and bioturbated.
Below is 3 cm of compact, homogeneous loam rich in
clay, spherulites, oxalates, phytoliths, and some fine
charcoal fragments. Below there is 0.5 cm of charcoal
rich material with horizontal distribution, and relatively
sharp upper contact. This rests on a 1.5 cm red compact
clay layer. The clay (kaolinite: FTIR) has striated fabric,
a few clay papules, fine calcitic nodules, and quartzite
and mica schist fragments. Below the material is again
a compact loam that gradually becomes fragmented and
bioturbated.
Not studied.
Mostly detrital calcite in a clayey groundmass with
developed pedality. Some bioturbation is evident in the
upper part.
Same as above.
Red decalcified kaolinite (FTIR) with sharp contacts.
The clay has striated fabric, and quartzite and mica
schist fragments.
Large amounts of wood ash, wood charcoal fragments,
and charred plant remains mixed with detrital calcite
and fragments from the bedrock.
Red decalcified kaolinite (FTIR) with striated fabric
(mainly along peds), clay papules, quartzite, mica schist
and other metamorphic rock fragments. Iron staining
present.
Red decalcified kaolinite (FTIR) rich in silty mica and
quartz. The groundmass has striated fabric and some
clay papules. A few calcitic aggregates and quartzite
fragments present.
Groundmass with b-crystallitic fabric. A lot of calcitic
nodules, mica schist and quartzite fragments.

Plastered floor.

Plastered floors, some
disturbed, with a clay
structure (hearth) in between.

Plastered floors.
Pedogenically altered
colluvial material.
Same as above.
Red clay mass intentionally
brought into the cave.
Raked out burnt remains.

Bt horizon.

Bt horizon.

Bk horizon.

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

1635

Fig. 4. Stratigraphic sections of Kouveleiki Cave A front chamber (left) and rear chamber (right). Note the crude stratified grey and white layers in the lower part of
the front chamber and the layered appearance in the rear chamber evident particularly in the upper and lower part of the photo.

(Table 2; see also ref. [20], Fig. 7). This type of trampling is
usually attributed to humans [27,28,31,34].
5.2. Internal chamber
In parts of the interior chamber several superimposed layers
of about 5 cm thickness were defined (Figs. 3 and 4b; Tables 1
and 2). In most cases they are highly cracked and intersected
by channels and a few chambers. Nevertheless, it was possible
to observe that the intact parts consist of a highly homogenized compact mixture of burnt dung material and clay, with
some dispersed sand and granule size limestone fragments.
In addition, each layer has its unique proportion of dung and
clay components and, in some cases, clear-cut contacts
(Figs. 6aec). In general, fine comminuted charred material,
oxalate druses, spherulites, phytoliths, and some silty and
granule quartz clasts are embedded in a clay and silt-sized calcitic matrix. The even distribution of spherulites inside the matrix produces a closed speckled pattern. Some rare calcitic ash
crystals and aggregates of dung remnants can still be observed.
The matrix is well homogenized at a grain-size scale, and
packing voids are less than 5% (Figs. 6b,c). In some cases,
one can see clay-rich areas to diffuse gradually in dung-rich
material (Figs. 6d,e). In one case there was a clay-rich finishing coat on the top of a defined layer (Fig. 6d).
A few clay constructions in the form of small thin platforms
were noted in several parts of the interior cave chamber (e.g.
layers AMW3 and AMW4, Table 2). Microscopically,
(Fig. 6f) they are similar to the already described clay-rich finishing coats (Fig. 6d) and clay aggregates (Fig. 6e). However,
given their greater thickness (1e2 cm), some additional microscopic observations can be made (Fig. 7a). The clay is kaolinite
(identified with FTIR), homogeneous with well-developed thick
striated fabric, some clay papules, and very few isolated calcitic
nodules and aggregates. The coarser material consists of silt and

sand quartz, quartzite, and schist grains. From field observations
it seems that in all cases the clay constructions are associated
with large amounts of burnt remains. At a microscopic scale,
horizons full of horizontally aligned charcoal fragments can
be observed above the studied clay construction (Fig. 6f).
5.3. Kouveleiki B
The lower part of the sequence (layer B4, Tables 1 and 2)
consists of a quite large amount of ash crystals and charcoal
fragments, intermixed with silty limestone fragments and
brownish clay matrix. The upper part (layer B1, Tables 1
and 2) is mostly devoid of ash and charcoal fragments, and
is rather more clayey and rubified.
The micromoprhological analysis of the large red clay
masses (e.g. layer B3, Tables 1 and 2) confirms their exotic
source. The contacts are mostly knife sharp and, even when
some mixture is evident, the contrasting materials are visible.
The red masses consist mainly of clay with little sand and silt
sized quartz, quartzite and schist fragments (Fig. 7b). The red
clay matrix presents discontinuous, random, and cross striated
fabrics, fragments of limpid clay coatings, and calcitic nodules. Similar clay masses are also found in the external chamber of Kouveleiki A. It is apparent that the clay constructions,
as well as the clay aggregates, finishing coats, and matrix
found inside the sediment of the interior chamber of cave A,
come from these masses.
5.4. Soils of the area
An attempt was made to locate the source of the red clay
masses found in the external chamber of Kouveleiki A and
in Kouveleiki B (Tables 1 and 2). Red soils can indeed be
found in the plain in front of the cave. They resemble the
red masses in that they are dominated by red bright kaolinite

1636

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

6. Interpretation of the results
6.1. Kouveleiki A, external chamber

Fig. 5. Microphotographs from samples of burnt dung deposits from the external chamber of Kouveleiki A. (a) Fragments of subrounded sheep/goat coprolites (plane polarized light) with different degrees of burning (the light
coloured left fragment is totally ashed). The inset shows a detail of the burnt
coprolites comprising spherulites and oxalates (crossed polarized light). (b)
Grey wood ash crystals and pseudomorphic cellular wood structures (plane
polarized light) associated with dicotyledonous leave epidermis phytoliths
(inset). (c) Non-porous compacted mixture of wood ashes, aggregates of
charred and burnt dung material, and clay and limestone fragments.

(identified with FTIR) with variably striated fabrics, but
mostly along fractures and ped surfaces, and that they have
the same mineral and rock components (mica schist, quartz,
and quartzite) (Fig. 7c).

According to the evidence, the entrance chamber is an area
where dung was frequently burnt, although due to total combustion there are no macroscopic indications of coprolitic material. Most of the area does not preserve a clear stratigraphy,
a fact suggesting that the deposits were frequently disturbed.
However, the profiles close to the walls show lateral continuation of most of the layers, with crude alternation of dark and
light grey layers, attributed mainly to the fluctuation of wood
charcoal and half-burnt dung content (layers AS1e9, Table 2).
In addition, there are thin stony horizons and trampled compacted surfaces separating some of the layers; occasionally,
the presence of relict intact wood ash lenses is also observed
(Fig. 4, left; Table 2; Fig. 5). All these features suggest that
most of the material was burnt in situ, but each time was trampled and moderately reworked by human activity. The presence of leaf phytoliths within the undisturbed wood ash
horizons is an indication of burning branches (Fig. 5b). They
were only found on top of a series of burnt dung, and thus
they were rather used as a fuel to initiate the burning of the
underlying dung.
The half-burnt coprolite remnants do not exhibit the layered
appearance that could be an indication of cattle dung; moreover, they lack the phosphatic matrix usually found in omnivore dung, and their charred organic component is highly
fragmented. Cattle produce a high amount of liquid waste,
and thus, even when the dung is burnt, there is a high probability of non-completely combusted horizons [12]. In contrast, the
compact nature of the material, the subrounded surface shapes,
and the spherulite and charred material content and structure
suggest the presence of goat or sheep dung (Fig. 5a). The identification of cereal phytoliths inside several dung fragments
indicates that the animals were fed with cereals; considering
the small size of the chamber it is not unreasonable to assume
that only a few of them were kept at each time.
However, the arrangement of the more ashy layers does not
resemble the complete, regular stratified sequence of the type
of facies 3, as defined in the stabling deposits of Arene Candide [29]. In particular, there is no dark brown substrate of
woody stained material, and the stratification is cruder, alternating between dark and light grey zones. All layers are particularly ashy and dominated by spherulites, phytoliths, and
oxalate druses; they are further characterized by fluctuating
contents of wood charcoal and ash. The differences are attributed to the dry conditions of the front area (which is, thus, susceptible to reworking), the absence of cattle dung, and the low
rate of coprolite accumulation; all these factors facilitate the
total burning of the stabling deposits. Nevertheless, the micromorphological evidence suggests that, despite these differences, the sediment of this chamber of the cave, resembles
in general the stabling layers identified in several Neolithic
caves [4,5,12,29].
There are no indications of post-depositional chemical
alteration or recrystallization that could have destroyed or

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

1637

Fig. 6. Microphotographs from samples of constructed floors from the interior chamber of Kouveleiki A. (a) Sharp upper contact (with arrow) of a plastered floor.
(b) and (c) Well-homogenized at a grain-size scale and compacted sediment of two different plastered floors; (b) is more dung rich (crossed polarized light,) hence
the fine dotted birefringence pattern of the matrix due to the presence of large amounts of spherulites and oxalates (see detail of the matrix in the inset), and (c) is
more clay-rich (plane polarized light). (d) Clay rich finishing coating comprising large amounts of quartz and quartzite fragments (crossed polarized light). (e) Clay
rich areas diffusing into the matrix (plain polarized light). The inset shows a detail of these areas with remains of pure clay fragments rich in quartz clasts (crossed
polarized light). (f) Detail of a flat clay construction. Note the charcoal fragments on top of it (plane polarized light) and the quartz content of the matrix (inset,
crossed polarized light).

change any original components. The sediment is dry and
only some scattered calcitic hypocoatings were noted in the
area of the entrance. On the other hand, oxidation of the
organic matter could have occurred. However, the more
clastic-rich layers in the entrance area contain neither large
quantities of burnt dung, nor significant amounts of phytoliths

that would be an indication of decayed non-combusted dung
material. Instead, they contain a lot of detrital calcite.
Spherulites are expected to survive in this highly calcitic environment [10]. In view of this evidence, the dung-poor layers
should be considered as another indication of seasonal use of
the chamber as a pen.

1638

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

a small stone-build fireplace should be explained in terms of
activities taking place when animals were not kept inside the
chamber. In a similar way, a burial pot that was found in the
middle of the sequence is another clear evidence of the seasonal use of the cave chamber as a pen.
6.2. Kouveleiki A, Interior chamber
The interior chamber shows clearly a different picture. The
occasional presence of well-defined levels, each one made of
a homogeneous unique mixture of clay and burnt dung, and
the extraneous source of the used clay imply that they are plastered floors (Figs. 4, right and 6). The microscopic features of
the clay component, and particularly the preservation of fine
clay patches with diffuse boundaries in some not well-mixed
areas (Fig. 6e), the presence of some internal slaking, and
the lack of large amount of vesicles suggest intense wet working of the mixture (kneading) before application.
It is important to stress the difference in microscopic fabric
between the compacted, trampled, surfaces of the external
chamber and the plastered floors in the interior (compare
Figs. 6c and 5b,c,e). Despite the fact that both were made
by the same materials and have compacted dense fabrics,
they do not show the same homogenisation on a grain size
scale. The compacted, trampled surfaces are a mixture of different aggregates of one component, of variable sizes, but normally of several tens or hundreds of microns (Fig. 5c). On the
other hand, the matrix of the plastered floors consists mostly of
evenly distributed elementary components (ash crystals, phytoliths, oxalate druses, spherulites, charred flakes, etc.; Figs.
5b,c,e). The plastered floors do preserve coarser aggregates
and fragments, but these are like isolated remnants. The difference can be certainly attributed to the good working of the
mixture in the presence of water.
Pure clay with its inherited coarse component was used for
other construction purposes, probably for preparation of
hearths. These are always associated with large amount of
burnt wood (e.g. layer AMW4, Table 2). It is reasonable to assume that most of the burnt dung was provided from the external chamber. Indeed, the preservation of intact stratigraphy at
the entrance chamber only in the areas close to the wall and
the entrance to the interior chamber might be the result of
frequent disturbance of the rest of the area for the supply of
dung to be used as a construction material.
Fig. 7. Microphotographs from samples of a clay construction (top), a red clay
mass from the cave deposits (middle), and a red soil from the plain in front of
the cave (bottom). Note the similarities in coarse component and clay
structure.

The purpose of the use of certain bowl-like clay constructions that were found in the front chamber is not yet resolved.
It might be related to pastoral procedure, but also to other
household activities. The same holds for some stone constructions towards the east wall of the chamber. However,
micromorphological study of their remains was not conducted,
because the area was totally excavated before sampling was
decided. The occurrence of fish remains associated with

6.3. Kouveleiki B
Kouveleiki B does not present clear evidence as to the specific use of the cave; however, some broad inferences can be
drawn. For example, dung components, dispersed phytoliths,
or spherulites were not found in any context. Although slight
pedogenesis is evident in the upper part of the sequence, the
soil is still highly calcareous (layers B1e2, Table 2). It should
be noted, that spherulites have been identified in similar
oxidized calcareous environment, where all other evidence
of dung preservation has been destroyed (e.g. Drakaina
rockshelter, Kefallonia, Greece: personal unpublished data).

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

Constructed features like floors or hearth platforms were
also not observed. However, the lower layers (layer B4, Table
2) were full of dispersed wood ash; there were also large
masses of red clay in certain areas close to the walls (layer
B3, Table 2). The drain channel is also of importance, since
it shows that special care for the rainwater entering through
the opening in the cave roof was taken.
Considering the coarse nature of the other archaeological
findings, it seems that some rudimentary activities were also
carried out in this cave, but these were probably complementing those taking place in Cave A. It is noteworthy that there
are no indications of stabling activities in this cave. This
lack reinforces the suggestion that only animals for special
purposes were herded in Cave A, while the majority of herding
was taking place in another area, perhaps outside the cave, or
in the surrounding area.
7. Discussion
It is evident that the interior of Cave A was inhabited more
frequently. This is suggested by the identification of the sequence of plastered floors made by well-kneaded clay and
burnt dung (Table 2; Fig. 6). Habitation areas, as early as
the Neolithic, are often characterized by the construction of
floors [31e33]. In addition, the frequent hearth clay constructions (Fig. 6f), along with several other features, attest to the
use of this area as an ordinary household. For example, one
of the fallen rocks that separate the two chambers has been
curved and straightened from the inside in order to resemble
a wall. The latter was used as a corridor that separates the
two areas (Fig. 3). Remnants of a wall built with irregular
stones are found as a continuation of the curved block; in
this manner, the two chambers in this area were completely
separated. Non-constructed dung deposits were not identified
in this chamber, something that was expected, given the darkness of the chamber that normally repulses animals. The
amount of investment in the internal chamber, as seen both
in the fixed constructions and the superimposed floors, is an
indication of the intensive character of the occupation.
In contrast, the front chamber is dominated by frequently
trampled and disturbed burnt stabling deposits (Table 2;
Fig. 5), most likely of ovicaprines. Seasonal change in the
use of the front chamber of the cave is very likely, but there
is no clear evidence of domestic occupational activities in it,
as the micromorphological study has shown. For example, indications of any kind of floors were not identified, in contrast
to the interior chamber. It is, thus, reasonable to assume that
the exterior chamber was used as a seasonal pen (perhaps
for special animals, such as very young or milkers) and probably as a place for rudimentary activities.
However, several portable archaeological findings (pottery,
bones, lithics, etc.) do not show clearly this dichotomy in the
use of space (E. Stravopodi, personal communication). A mixture of bones of very young animals was found in the external
chamber of Kouveleiki A, mostly sheep, goat and pig,
although some deer and wild boar were also identified
(E. Kotjambopoulou, unpublished excavation files). In general

1639

there was no difference in the archaeozoological material
found in the internal chamber, except a few samples of adult
cattle that were identified in this case. Part of this picture could
be explained as the result of certain behavioral patterns of the
Neolithic inhabitants. In particular, secondary deposition of refuse, c.f. ref. [26] from the interior to the exterior chamber,
and back from the entrance to the interior through the use of
the sediment for the construction of floors, would eventually
lead to the homogenization of the cultural content. Nevertheless, some activities should be seen in the context of the use
of the cave as a whole. Both chambers were simultaneously
used and considered part of the same household. So several activities could alternate between the front and the rear chamber
of the cave, but certainly not all activities were taking place in
both of them. The front was the herding area and it might have
assumed the function of a sheltered yard. The back chamber
was dark and it was the main living area.
Although the seasonal abandonment of the whole cave during certain times of the year in accordance with transhumant
practices cannot be fully ruled out, all the evidence is against
it. First, the surrounding area is rather ideal for year round
grazing, located in a mixed terrain of middle altitude with
elements of both highlands and lowlands. The rugged hilly
limestone area on the back, transected by several deep valleys,
is a mild and rich mountainous area, and the vast stony plain in
front, although not suitable for cultivation, was certainly good
for grazing. Second, there are nine primary and secondary
burials in both caves (E. Stravopodi, personal communication). The presence of primary burials in both caves might
be an additional indication of self-containment of the cave
household, c.f. ref. [2], along with the repeated pattern of floor
construction, the value of which has been attested both by ethnoarchaeological and geoarchaeological studies, e.g. refs.
[25,31e33]. Third, the evidence that the animals in the front
chamber were fed with the inflorescence of cereals suggests
directly that crop husbandry was an equal subsistence base
for the occupants of the caves, since it is highly unlikely
that exchange relationships with crop-growing communities
would have sustained the supply of such fodder for the animals. The presence of hunted wild game further supports the
idea of a mixed farming household. In sum, if the same criteria
for evaluating sedentism in a Neolithic open site household
were applied to the Kouveleiki case without taking under consideration that they are caves, the inevitable conclusion would
be the existence of a self-contained household.
The study of the Kouveleiki caves sheds new light into the
issue of the observed increase in cave occupation during the
Late and Final Neolithic of Greece [13,17]. The Kouveleiki
case presents coherent evidence of a small-scale self-contained
mixed farming household in a marginal area. In this sense, it is
generally in agreement with the idea of an expansion of mixed
farming communities into areas well-endowed with caves
[16,17]. However, I do not know if the selection of the Kouveleiki caves as a habitation area was only a matter of convenience, since considerable effort went to the creation and
organization of space (curved limestone blocks, stone walls,
plastered floors, clay procurement, etc.).

1640

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641

Undoubtedly, the issue of the reasons behind the occupation
of these marginal areas during the Late Neolithic is far from
being resolved. Nevertheless, this study has shown that
contextual sedimentological and microstratigraphic analysis,
micromorphology, is one of the most powerful tools both for
the identification of direct evidence of stabling activities
(an issue of primary interest for this period) and for the establishment of a context for the evaluation of the rest of the
archaeological evidence. Micromorphology was able to reveal
the nature of the burnt layers in the front chamber of Kouveleiki A, where no macroscopic traces or indications of dung
were discerned during the excavation. In addition, the identification of plastered floors in the interior chamber was also a result of the same analysis. Although very careful field
observation would indicate the presence of some straight surfaces, it was very hard, given their homogeneous muddy appearance, to decide whether these surfaces were beaten
floors, occupational floors, or even natural features. Nonetheless, the dung presence was put in its real context.

8. Conclusions
The micromorphological study of the sediments of the
Kouveleiki caves and the reassessment of the archaeological
record under the new data revealed that the site constituted
a small-scale self-contained mixed farming household in
a marginal area. The rear dark chamber of Cave A was the
main habitation area, while the front chamber was used as
a small seasonal pen and as a place for rudimentary activities.
The nearby Kouveleiki Cave B was probably used as a complementary activity area.
The study of the microstructure and the microstratigraphy
of the cave sequences made possible the identification of the
stabling location of the ovicarpines in the front chamber of
the cave and provided indications for some of the activities related to them, like the nature of their diet and the regular burning of the produced dung. Plastered floors, made by a mixture
of burnt dung derived from the seasonal pen and red clay from
the plain in front of the cave, were also identified. The floors
were repeatedly constructed in the interior chamber of one of
the caves.
These findings offer a new dimension in understanding the
increased use of caves during the Late Neolithic of Greece.
The relatively elaborated architectural features and the partitioning of the use of space indicate that caves were not only
used as temporal and convenient places, or for special uses,
but could have functioned as the seats of self-contained
complete households.

Acknowledgements
The author is indebted to the directors of the excavation
E. Stravopodi and C. Kontaxi for their support during fieldwork. I gratefully acknowledge a Research Fellowship granted
by the Wiener Laboratory, American School of Classical

Studies at Athens. I am also grateful to two anonymous reviewers for their comments.
References
[1] O. Akeret, P. Rentzel, Micromorphology and plant macrofossil analysis
of cattle dung from the Neolithic lake shore settlement of Arbon Bleiche
3, Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 16 (2001) 687e700.
[2] S. Andreou, M. Fotiadis, K. Kotsakis, Review of Aegean prehistory V:
The Neolithic and Bronze Age of Northern Greece, American Journal
of Archaeology 100 (1996) 537e597.
[3] J.L. Bintliff, Natural Environmental and Human Settlement in Prehistoric
Greece, BAR Supplementary Series 28i (1997).
[4] G. Boscian, Sedimentology and soil micromorphology of the Late
Pleistocene and Early Holocene deposits of Grotta dell’Edera (Trieste
Karst, NE Italy), Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 12 (1997)
227e249.
[5] G. Boschian, E. Montagnari-Kokelj, Prehistoric shepherds and caves in
trieste Karst (northeastern Italy), Geoarchaeology: An International
Journal 15 (2000) 332e371.
[6] J.E. Brochier, P. Villa, M. Giacomarra, A. Tagliacozzo, Sheperds and
sediments: geo-ethnoarchaeology of pastoral sites, Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 11 (1992) 47e102.
[7] P. Bullock, N. Fedorroff, A. Jongerius, G.I. Stoops, T. Tursina, Handbook
for Soil Thin Section Description, Waine Research Publishers,
Wolverhampton, 1985.
[8] M.G. Canti, An investigation of microscopic calcareous spherulites from
herbivore dungs, Journal of Archaeological Science 24 (1997) 219e231.
[9] M.G. Canti, The micromorphological identification of faecal spherulites
from archaeological and modern materials, Journal of Archaeological
Science 25 (1998) 435e444.
[10] M.G. Canti, The production and preservation of faecal spherulites: animals, environments and taphonomy, Journal of Archaeological Science
26 (1999) 251e258.
[11] M.A. Courty, P. Goldberg, R. Macphail, Soils and micromorphology in
archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989.
[12] M.A. Courty, R.I. Macphail, J. Wattez, Soil micromorphological indicators of pastoralism, with special reference to Arene Candide, Finale
Ligure, Italy, Rivista di Studi Liguri, A LVII (1991) 127e150.
[13] J.P. Demoule, C. Perles, The Greek Neolithic: a review, Journal of World
Prehistory 7 (1993) 355e416.
[14] A. Gebhardt, R. Langohr, Micromorphological study of construction
materials and living floors in the Medieval Motte of Werken (West
Flandres, Belgium), Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 14 (1999)
595e620.
[15] P. Halstead, Man and other animals in later Greek prehistory, BSA 82
(1987) 71e83.
[16] P. Halstead, Neighbours from hell? The household in Neolithic Greece,
in: P. Halstead (Ed.), Neolithic Society in Greece, Sheffield Academic
Press, Sheffield, 1999, pp. 77e95.
[17] P. Halstead, Land use in postglacial Greece: cultural causes and environmental effects, in: P. Halstead, C. Frederick (Eds.), Landscape and Land
Use in Postglacial Greece, Sheffield University Press, Sheffield, 2000,
pp. 110e128.
[18] P. Halstead, G. Jones, Bioarchaeological remains from Kalythies cave,
Rhodes, in: A. Sampson (Ed.), I Neolithiki Periodos sta Dodekanisa,
Ministry of Culture, Athens, 1987, pp. 135e152.
[19] P. Karkanas, Preliminary geological results of A and B Kouveleiki caves,
Lakonia: their impact of the archaeological interpretation of the excavation, Athens, Annals of Archaeology XXIXeXXXI (1996e1998)
95e112 (in Greek with English abstract).
[20] P. Karkanas, Micromorphological studies of Greek prehistoric sites: new
insights in the interpretation of the archaeological record, Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 17 (2002) 237e259.
[21] Kaznezi, S. Katsarou, The Neolithic pottery from Kouveleiki cave B at
Alepochori, Lakonia, Athens, Annals of Archaeology XXXIIeXXXIV
(1999e2001) 27e36 (in Greek with English abstract).

P. Karkanas / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 1628e1641
[22] C.X. Kontaxi, E. Kotzambopoulou, E. Stravopodi, Provisional report of
the excavation in the ‘A Kouveleiki cave’’, at Alepochori in Lakonia,
Athens, Annals of Archaeology VVII (1989) 21e30 (in Greek with
English abstract).
[23] C.X. Kontaxi, E. Stravopodi, The excavation of Kouveleiki cave B,
Athens, Annals of Archaeology XXXIIeXXXIV (1999e2001) 19e26
(in Greek with English abstract).
[24] M. Koumouzelis, The pottery from the ‘‘A Kouveleiki cave’’ at Alepochori in Lakonia, Athens, Annals of Archaeology XXII (1989) 143e
160 (in Greek with English abstract).
[25] C. Kramer, An archaeological view of a contemporary Kurdish village:
Domestic architecture, household size, and wealth, in: C. Cramer
(Ed.), Ethnoarchaeology. Implications of Ethnography for Archaeology,
Columbia University Press, New York, 1979, pp. 139e163.
[26] V.M. LaMotta, M.B. Schiffer, Formation processes of house floor assemblages, in: P.M. Allison (Ed.), The Archaeology of Household Activities,
Rothledge, London, 1999, pp. 19e29.
[27] R.I. Macphail, P. Goldberg, Recent advances in micromorphological interpretations of soils and sediments from archaeological sites, in:
A.J. Barham, R.I. Macphail (Eds.), Archaeological Sediments and Soils:
Analysis, Interpretation and Management, Institute of Archaeologhy,
University College, London, 1995, pp. 1e24.
[28] R.I. Macphail, J. Cruise, The soil micromorphology as team player, in:
P. Goldberg, V.T. Holiday, C.R. Reiding (Eds.), Earth Sciences and
Archaeology, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 2001,
pp. 241e267.
[29] R.I. Macphail, M.A. Courty, J. Hather, J. Wattez, The soil micromorphological evidence of domestic occupation and stabling activities, in:
R. Maggi (Ed.), Arene Candide: A Functional and Environmental
Assessment of the Holocene Sequences Excavated by L. Bernando
’Brea (1940e1950) (1997), pp. 53e88.
[30] R.I. Macphail, G.M. Cruise, J.R.M. Allen, J. Linderholm, P. Reynolds,
Archaeological soil and pollen analysis of experimental floor deposits;
with special references to Nutzer Ancient Farm, Hampshire, UK, Journal
of Archaeological Science 31 (2004) 175e191.

1641

[31] W. Mathews, Micromophological characterization and interpretation
of occupation deposits and microstratigraphic sequences at Abu
Salabikh, Southern Iraq, in: A.J. Barham, R.I. Macphail (Eds.),
Archaeological Sediments and Soils: Analysis, Interpretation and Management, Institute of Archaeologhy, University College, London, 1995,
pp. 41e74.
[32] W. Matthews, J.N. Postage, S. Paney, M.P. Charles, K. Dobney, The imprint of living in an early Mesopotamian city: questions and answers, in:
R. Luff, P. Rowley-Conway (Eds.), Whither environmental archaeology?
Oxbow Monograph 38, Oxford, 1994, pp. 171e212.
[33] W. Matthews, C. French, T. Lawrence, D. Cutler, Multiple surfaces: the
micromorphology, in: I. Hodder (Ed.), On the Surface: Catalhoyuk
1993e95, The MacDonald Institute for Research and British Institute
of Archaeology of Ankara, Cambridge, 1996, pp. 301e342.
[34] W. Matthews, C.A.I. French, T. Lawrence, D.F. Cutler, M.K. Jones, Microstratigraphic traces of site formation processes and human activities,
World Archaeology 29 (1997) 281e308.
[35] C.P. Murphy, Thin Section Preparation of Soils and Sediments, A B
Academic Publishers, 1986.
[36] A. Sampson, Late Neolithic remains at Tharounia, Euboea: a model for
the seasonal use of settlements and caves, BSA 87 (1992) 61e101.
[37] R. Shahack-Gross, F. Marshall, S. Weiner, Geo-ethnoarchaeology of
pastoral sites: the identification of livestock enclosures in abandoned
Maasai settlements, Journal of Archaeological Science 30 (2003)
439e459.
[38] R. Skeates, The human uses of caves in east-central Italy during the
Mesolithic, Neolithic and Copper Age, in: C. Bonsall, C. Tolan-Smith
(Eds.), The Human Use of Caves, BAR International Series, vol. 667,
1997, pp. 79e86.
[39] C. Tolan-Smith, C. Bonsall, The Human Use of Caves, in: C. Bonsall,
C. Tolan-Smith (Eds.), BAR International Series, vol. 667, 1997, pp.
217e218.
[40] K.L. Zachos, Zas cave on Naxos, and the role of caves in the Aegean
Late Neolithic, in: P. Halstead (Ed.), Neolithic Society in Greece,
Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield, 1999, pp. 154e163.

