Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Geoarchaeological investigations at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western
Cape, South Africa
Christopher E. Miller a, *, Paul Goldberg b, c,1, Francesco Berna b, d,1, 2
a

Institute for Archaeological Sciences, University of Tübingen, Rümelinstr. 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
Department of Archaeology, Boston University, 675 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, MA 02215, USA
c
The Role of Culture in Early Expansions of Humans (ROCEEH), Heidelberg Academy of Science, University of Tübingen, Rümelinstr. 23, 72070 Tübingen,
Germany
d
Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 22 October 2012
Received in revised form
15 February 2013
Accepted 16 February 2013

The sedimentary sequence at Diepkloof Rock Shelter formed through a complex interaction of depositional and post-depositional processes and was variously inﬂuenced by biogenic, geogenic, and
anthropogenic agents. Here, we present the results of a micromorphological study of the sediments at
Diepkloof, focusing in particular on the numerous anthropogenic inputs and modiﬁcations recorded
within the sequence. By applying the microfacies concept, we were able to identify hearth burning and
maintenance, bedding construction and burning, and surface modiﬁcation by trampling as major processes that contributed to the formation of the site. The human activities recorded within the sediments
show a marked change throughout the sequence, implying a shift in the use of the site over time. The
present study also provides a context for evaluating other classes of artifacts and data collected from the
site.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Middle Stone Age
Micromorphology
FTIR
Site formation processes
Combustion features

1. Introduction
Excavations at Diepkloof Rock Shelter (DRS) have yielded a
long, cultural sequence spanning MIS 5e3 and including pre-Still
Bay, Still Bay (SB), Howiesons Poort (HP), post-HP and Later Stone
Age (LSA) occupations (Table 1) (Parkington et al., 2013; Porraz
et al., 2013; Tribolo et al., 2013). Such a complete sequence is
unusual in South Africa. Therefore, DRS provides a rare opportunity to investigate the cultural evolution of modern humans living
along the western coast of southern Africa during the Middle
Stone Age (MSA). The archaeological record of DRS, as with any
archaeological site, does not consist solely of chipped stone, ochre,
eggshell containers, and ﬂoral and faunal remains. Rather, these
materials are embedded within a sedimentary matrix that provides the ultimate context for the interpretation of the site
(Goldberg and Berna, 2010). The present geoarchaeological study
investigates the site formation processes at DRS, emphasizing the

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ49 (0) 7071 29 76 511.
E-mail addresses: christopher.miller@uni-tuebingen.de (C.E. Miller), paulberg@
bu.edu (P. Goldberg), fberna@bu.edu, francesco_berna@sfu.ca (F. Berna).
1
Tel.: þ1 617 358 1666.
2
Tel.: þ1 778 782 9674.
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.02.014

roles that various depositional and post-depositional agents have
played in forming this important archaeological sequence.
Geoarchaeological research at DRS has focused on two main
issues in the interpretation of the sequence and site. First, we
wished to investigate the integrity of the various layers and contexts, testing hypotheses developed from the analysis of various
classes of artifacts. Speciﬁcally, our investigation addresses the
following questions about the sequence: do we see major depositional hiatuses in the sequence? Do transitions between various
technocomplexes reﬂect longer-term periods of cultural change, or
do they represent abrupt changes that have been masked by later
post-depositional processes, such as bioturbation? And, are precocious technological and symbolic artifacts located within stratigraphically secure contexts?
Secondly, we wished to identify the various geogenic, biogenic,
and anthropogenic processes that led to the formation of the DRS
sequence and understand how these processes changed over time.
Through the use of micromorphology, geoarchaeologists are able to
isolate different agents and processes that form a site, making it
possible to identify human actions that helped to create the geoarchaeological record (Courty et al., 1989). Thus, with the appropriate analytical tools, geoarchaeologists treat deposits as proper
artifacts (Goldberg and Bar-Yosef, 1998; Goldberg and Berna, 2010;
Miller, 2011), and by identifying the various human activities that

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452
Table 1
List of Stratigraphic Units (SUs) present in the Main Sector proﬁle (K 6/7eM 6/7)
and sampled for micromorphological analysis. Corresponding Lithostratigraphic
Units (LUs) and Technocultural subdivisions (Porraz et al., 2013) are also given. The
reported Luminescence ages are averages of dates obtained from multiple samples
from the same SUs, as detailed in Table 3 of Tribolo et al. (2013). Note that the
averaged date for the Late HP, indicated in parentheses, was obtained from SUs
OB2e4 in the “Back Sector” (Fig. 2), as described in Tribolo et al. (2013).

3433

that have undergone low-grade metamorphism. Differential
erosion of the relatively horizontal-lying beds of the TMG at
Diepkloof is responsible for the formation of both DRS and Diepkloof Kraal. The erosion of weaker, underlying beds, particularly
a shaley member found at the back of the shelter (Dayet et al.,
2013), created instability in the more resistant, overlying quartzitic beds at the koppie, leading to extensive collapse and the formation of an overhang. The sizes of rocks that have fallen from the
walls and roof of the shelter vary from tens of cms to several ms in
diameter. A large boulder of rockfall (about 13 m across) at the
entrance to DRS (Fig. 1) is likely responsible for the thick accumulation of sedimentary deposits within the shelter, since it
formed a semi-enclosed space that protected the site from erosive
processes.
The ca. 200 m2 of space within the shelter is largely ﬁlled with
sediments of variable thickness that accumulated behind this
boulder. Lenoble and Martineau (2003) used a penetrometer survey to estimate that the thickest accumulations were within the
K6eL6 sector, which is located toward the entrance of the shelter
(Parkington et al., 2013). A deep sounding within these squares has
uncovered a ca. 3.1 m thick sequence. It is not clear if the current
base of excavation, which ended on top of an accumulation of
quartzite blocks, is close to bedrock, or if the deposits continue
signiﬁcantly below (see Parkington et al., 2013, for a detailed discussion of the excavation grid and history of research). Although
ﬁeld observations from different parts of the excavation trench
have been included in the geoarchaeological study, the results and
interpretations presented here are based largely on samples and
observations collected from the K6eM6 sector, which forms part of
the Main Sector (M5eM9/N5eN9) used in other analyses (Texier
et al., 2013) (Fig. 2).
1.2. Micromorphology and microfacies analysis

contributed to the accumulation of deposits at DRS, we are able to
construct interpretations of past human behavior. Speciﬁcally, we
wished to address the following questions: what past human activities contributed to the formation of the sequence? How do these
activities vary diachronically? And, does the diachronic variation in
past human activities reﬂect changes in the settlement dynamics of
the MSA inhabitants of DRS?
1.1. The site and its geographical and geological setting
DRS, along with the nearby shelter of Diepkloof Kraal, forms a
complex of sites (“Diepkloof”) located ca. 180 km north of Cape
Town within a remnant butte, or koppie, of bedded, quartzitic
sandstone of the Table Mountain Group (TMG). The sites sit ca.
100 m above the southern shore of the Verlorenvlei River, which
meets the Atlantic Ocean at Elandsbaai, approximately 14 km
northwest of Diepkloof (Parkington et al., 2013). The Ordovician
TMG dominates the bedrock geology around Diepkloof, and consists of bedded sandstones, siltstones, shales, and conglomerates

In this study we apply the method of micromorphology, coupled
with detailed ﬁeld observations and Fourier Transform infrared
(FTIR) spectroscopy of loose sediment samples. Micromorphology
is the study of intact blocks of sediment that have been indurated
with a polyester resin, sliced, and made into petrographic thin
sections. The power of this method lies not just in its ability to
identify the sedimentary components of an archaeological deposit,
but in its ability to identify the spatial relationship of sedimentary
components, microfabrics, and post-depositional features. Therefore, micromorphology is ideal for the study of sites such as DRS,
where a complex interaction between geogenic, biogenic, and
anthropogenic processes has led to the formation of the archaeological record.
Within the Main Sector at DRS, more than 50 stratigraphic units
(SUs) have been identiﬁed. Most of these SUs do not represent a
single depositional event, but rather are complexes of discontinuous lenses and beds that form identiﬁable stratigraphic entities
that can be traced across the area of excavation. If we were to
count every lens, bed or lamination visible within the DRS
sequencedeach of which represents a single, depositional
eventdwe would number them in the hundreds, if not thousands.
Therefore, it is not practical, or productive, to describe each and
every depositional event individually. Rather, we have chosen to
use the concept of microfacies (Courty, 2001; Flügel, 2004;
Goldberg et al., 2009) to identify key types of deposits that occur
repeatedly throughout the sequence. At DRS, the individual depositional units e in the form of discontinuous beds, lenses and
laminations e are referred to as microfacies units (MF units). These
units in turn are classiﬁed into microfacies types (MF types). Multiple MF units form single stratigraphic units (SUs), which were
identiﬁed in the ﬁeld and form the main units of analysis for

3434

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Fig. 1. Diepkloof, the site. A) The Diepkloof complex, with Diepkloof Rock Shelter (DRS) and Diepkloof kraal (DK) indicated. These two shelters formed through differential erosion
of beds within the Table Mountain group (TMG). B) A large boulder (note people on top for scale) at the entrance to DRS. This boulder created a semi-enclosed space that hindered
erosive processes, allowing for the accumulation of sediments within the shelter.

excavation and other studies. The excavators gave the SUs names
(e.g., “Jeff”), which occur in alphabetical order from the top to the
bottom of the sequence (Parkington et al., 2013). In the geoarchaeological study, we grouped these SUs into four lithostratigraphic units (LUs) that are useful for evaluating larger scale
diachronic variations in the sequence (Figs. 3 and 4).
The microfacies concept has been successfully applied in several
geoarchaeological studies of site formation processes (Courty,

2001; Karkanas et al., 2011; Villagran et al., 2011), including at
the MSA site of Sibudu, South Africa (Goldberg et al., 2009), which
has many similarities with DRS. MF types are identiﬁed based on
the presence of different sedimentary components and their
structural organization, which can be informative about the mode
and environment of deposition. At archaeological sites, MF units
can form through geogenic, biogenic, and anthropogenic processes,
or a combination of all three. When the depositional agent of the

Fig. 2. Excavation plan of DRS. Micromorphology samples were collected from the “Main Sector.” The location of the proﬁle drawing illustrated in Fig. 3 is indicated by the thick, red
line. Geoarchaeological ﬁeld observations mentioned in the text were also conducted for the “Trench” and for the “Back Sector”. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3435

Fig. 3. The 3.1-m-thick sedimentary sequence of L6/7 and M6/7 at DRS (Fig. 2), showing the sampling locations for micromorphology. LUs 1e4 are indicated, along with the main
technocultural subdivisions (Porraz et al., 2013), and the stratigraphic occurrence of engraved ostrich eggshells (Texier et al., 2013).

MF unit is largely anthropogenic, the geoarchaeologist can identify
the human activities responsible for its formation. In particular, by
examining the anthropogenic MF units, and associations of MF
types, we are able to interpret the various human actions and behaviors that inﬂuenced the formation of the geoarchaeological
record.
One of the strengths of the microfacies approach is that the
individual anthropogenic MF units possess an inherent spatial
component. In other words, the ﬁnal human activity that inﬂuenced the formation of the MF unit occurred where it is found.
Therefore, microfacies analysis of stacked anthropogenic deposits
allows for a spatial reconstruction of human activities within a site.
The spatial analysis can incorporate diachronic variation in activities (Goldberg et al., 2009) or lateral variations in activities
(Villagran et al., 2011; Courty, 2001). The present geoarchaeological
research at DRS has focused on a column of samples from the Main
Sector, and so is mostly concerned with diachronic trends in MF
type variability. Future research at the site will expand the scope of
analysis to incorporate lateral variation in MF types.

2. Methods
In 2008 we collected 15 block samples (designated DRS-08-01
through DRS-08-15) from the east proﬁle of squares L6eM6 in
the Main Sector of the site (Fig. 3). The blocks of sediment were cut
from the proﬁle wall and wrapped in plaster bandages in order to
preserve their integrity. Following transport to the Geoarchaeology
Laboratory at the University of Tübingen, the blocks were oven
dried at a temperature of 60  C for ca. 24 h. The samples were then
indurated under vacuum in a mixture of unpromoted polyester
resin (Viscovoss), styrene, and MEKP-hardener. Once the mixture
had achieved a gel-like consistency, the samples were heated again
at 60  C overnight. The hardened blocks were then sliced and
subsampled for thin sectioning. Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA, USA) and P. Kritikakis of the Micromorphology Laboratory
at the University of Tübingen produced the thin sections, grinding
the samples to 30m thickness. In total, 45 thin sections were produced, providing nearly complete coverage of the 3.1-m sequence
in the Main Sector. Thin sections from Spectrum measure

3436

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

have either an anthropogenic, geogenic, or biogenic origin,
although in some cases, this origin is not always easy to determine.
A list and description of the sedimentary components identiﬁed in
thin sections from DRS is included in (Table 2).
3.2. Diagenetic minerals

Fig. 4. A schematic representation of the different analytical units used in this and
other studies. Individual microfacies units (MF units) consist of distinct beds, laminations and lenses and are the smallest analytical unit used in the geoarchaeological
study. Groups of MF units form stratigraphic units (SUs) which were deﬁned in the
ﬁeld and used as the basic unit of excavation. The SUs were grouped in this study into 4
lithostratigraphic units (LUs) that were identiﬁed based on larger-scale similarities in
appearance between the SUs.

50  75 mm and thin sections from Tübingen measure 60  90 mm.
The thin sections were observed under the naked eye and under
magniﬁcation (25e200) using a Zeiss Axio Imager petrographic
microscope with plane-polarized light (PPL), cross-polarized light
(XPL), oblique incident light (OIL), dark ﬁeld illumination and bluelight ﬂuorescence. Analysis of the thin sections followed procedures described by Stoops (2003) and Courty et al. (1989).
To compliment ﬁeld and micromorphological analyses, FTIR
analysis on loose samples was conducted using a Nicolet Nexus 470
FTIR spectrometer at the Laboratory of MicroStratigraphy at Boston
University. Representative FTIR spectra were obtained by grinding a
few tens of micrograms of sample using an agate mortar and pestle.
About 0.1 mg or less of the sample was mixed with about 50 mg of
KBr (IR-grade). A 7-mm pellet was made using a hand press (Qwik
Handi-Press, Spectra-Tech Industries Corporation) without evacuation. The spectra were collected between 4000 and 400 cm1 at
4 cm1 resolution. The composition of the acquired spectra was
analyzed by searching relevant standard spectral libraries available
in-house and from research institutions (Weiner, 2010).
3. Results

Diagenetic minerals are found throughout the DRS sequence
and along the walls of the rock shelter itself. In 2010, we collected
several loose samples of visible authigenic minerals from the
sediment and samples from the shelter wall for mineralogical
analysis. Our sampling strategy was aimed at gaining a preliminary
understanding of the diagenetic minerals present.
A common secondary mineral at DRS is gypsum (CaSO4$2H2O).
Within the sedimentary sequence, gypsum is found as soft, powdery nodules, varying from 1 mm in diameter up to 1 cm or more.
Large crystals of gypsum are also present. Gypsum is also found
along the shelter walls, where it forms long streaks below ledges on
which birds roost.
Also along the shelter walls are white, crystalline minerals
which form in cracks. X-ray diffraction analysis (conducted by
Laure Dayet, University of Bordeaux 3) of this mineral revealed it to
be sveite (KAl7(NO3)4(OH)16Cl2$8H2O). Niter (KNO3) is another
common nitrate mineral found at DRS, but so far it has been
identiﬁed only in speciﬁc locations of the site. It is found as a crust
cementing the surface of the sediments at the site and also as a
crust along a large boulder which is part of the large rock-fall event
near the entrance to the site. The crust along the boulder extends
throughout the entire sedimentary sequence in squares K5/6 and
L5/6. Spectral peaks associated with nitrates have been found in the
sedimentary sequence at DRS, but we were not able to assign them
to any speciﬁc mineral, although minerals resembling nitratite
(NaNO3) were found in thin section.
Secondary phosphates are relatively common at DRS and take
the form of mm-sized, yellowish nodules. FTIR analysis indicated
the phosphates as dahllite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2). Other types of
phosphates were not identiﬁed in our limited mineralogical analysis, but montgomeryite (Ca4MgAl4(PO4)6(OH)4$12(H2O)) was
tentatively detected in several thin sections.
Halite (NaCl), although not generally well preserved in thin
section, has been reported at DRS by Lenoble (2003).
3.3. Microfacies
We recognized seven major MF types e with several subdivisions e within the analyzed sequence at DRS. In Table 3 we
present descriptions of the MF types, some of which are similar to
those described at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009). However, the
deposits from DRS and Sibudu are different enough so that we
could not directly apply the Sibudu microfacies to the DRS analysis.
When parallels exist between the two sites, they are indicated in
Table 3. Photomicrographs of each of the MF types are provided in
Fig. 5.
3.4. The stratigraphic sequence and lithostratigraphic units
Based on ﬁeld observations, we can divide the DRS sequence
into four distinct lithostratigraphic units (LUs) (Fig. 6). Below we
present ﬁeld descriptions of the different LUs, along with micromorphological observations.

3.1. Sedimentary components
Although the sediments at DRS appear very heterogenous in the
ﬁeld, they are composed of only a few key components that are
present in variable amounts within different SUs. The components

3.4.1. Lithostratigraphic unit 1
LU 1, approximately 40 cm thick, is at the base of the sequence
and corresponds with SUs Nel, Nina, Noel and Mary. Nel is a dark
reddish brown (5 YR 3/3) silty sand. No sedimentary structures are

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3437

Table 2
List and description of components identiﬁed in thin sections of sediment from DRS.
Components

Description and notes

Sand- and silt-sized grains of
quartz and other
siliciclastic minerals

A ubiquitous geogenic component of the sediments at DRS is rounded, ﬁne to medium sand-sized grains of quartz. This sand has its
ultimate origin in the quartzitic sandstones of the TMG as demonstrated by the sutured rims of many of the sand grains. Most of the
sand grains were likely deposited as a result of disaggregation of the shelter walls, although some may have a more complex, aeolian
history. Sand dunes and sheet sands form the local Sandveld landscape around Diepkloof and are a potential minor source for some
of the sand-sized particles in the site. Some degree of aeolian input to DRS is suggested by the presence of silt-sized grains of quartz
in some SUs. However, silt is often associated with ashy deposits, suggesting that it may have been transported to the site on
vegetation used for fuel. Some of the silt could also be derived from the disaggregation of silty members of the TMG bedrock within
the shelter.
Occasional feldspar grains and micas are present in the DRS sediment. Like the quartz sand grains, these grains are most likely
derived from the TMG bedrock. The mica in particular is derived from beds of shale or slate found within the bedrock of the shelter.

“plaquettes” and “éboulis”

Larger fragments of the shelter bedrock are present within the DRS sediments as “plaquettes,” or ﬂat plates of quartzitic sandstone
produced by salt-induced spalling along the roof and walls of the shelter. Spalling exploited the bedding planes of the quartzitic
sandstone, forming fragments that are usually 1 cm thick, or less, and 5e10 cm in length, although some larger ones are occasionally
present. The platy plaquettes are morphologically distinct from blocks of quartzite éboulis found within the shelter’s sediments that
were deposited as spalling exploited vertical cracks within the bedrock. The inhabitants used the quartzitic éboulis as a raw material
and also likely transported quartzite from other locations to the shelter.

Silcrete

Pieces of silcrete are also identiﬁable in the micromorphological thin sections and have a clear anthropogenic origin. They were
transported from both local and exotic locations (Porraz et al., 2013). Some of the fragments have faceted edges, demonstrating their
relationship to chipped-stone artifacts (Angelucci, 2010)

Organic silt and humiﬁed
organic matter

Silt-sized fragments of ﬁnely comminuted, humiﬁed organic material make up a signiﬁcant portion of the sediment. The deposition
of this organic material, as with the larger macrobotanical remains (Cartwright, 2013), is likely a result of natural and cultural
processes. Some of the organic silt may have originated as plants which were transported to the site by humans for subsistence or
raw material. However, some of the organic silt may have originated as plant material brought to the site by nesting birds or other
animals. Another natural source of ﬁnely comminuted organic material is herbivore feces. Windblown leaves and small twigs may
also account for some of the accumulation of organic silt.

Charcoal

Fragments of charcoal, ranging from silt-sized to over 1 cm, are ubiquitous throughout the DRS sequence. In some SUs the charcoal
fragments appear rounded, whereas in others they appear angular. Fibrous charcoal (Goldberg et al., 2009) is also present, and likely
derives from monocotyledonous plants, such as sedges, grasses or reeds (Miller and Sievers, 2012; Wadley et al., 2011). The woody
charcoal at DRS is sometimes highly fragmented or comminuted as a result of secondary formation of minerals within the charcoal,
usually gypsum.

Ashes

Ashes, in the form of rhombic, calcareous pseudomorphs of calcium oxalate crystals (Courty et al., 1989; Canti, 2003; Shahack-Gross
and Ayalon, 2012), are present throughout the sequence, but not in every SU. Some of the ash rhombs appear very fresh, whereas
other ashes appear cemented or recrystallized. Considering the lithology of the rock shelter, most primary and secondary carbonates
present within the sediments most likely derive from plant ashes.

Phytoliths

Some of the ash deposits at DRS contain numerous phytoliths, often articulated and laminated. These deposits resemble those found
at the MSA site of Sibudu, where they were interpreted as the remains of burnt plant bedding (Goldberg et al., 2009; Wadley et al.,
2011). However, the phytoliths at DRS are intimately associated with calcareous material, which is not often the case at Sibudu.
Experimental combustion of sedges (the most likely plant used for bedding construction at Sibudu) produced laminated phytolith
deposits without a signiﬁcant calcareous ash component (Miller and Sievers, 2012). Continuing botanical studies will help identify
the source of the phytoliths at DRS.

Other combustion-derived
residues

In addition to ash, charcoal, phytoliths, and burnt bones, other combustion-derived residues are evident in thin section, most notably
fat-derived char (Goldberg et al., 2009). Although other combustion derived residues are likely present, these are more readily
identiﬁed by organic petrological analysis (Goldberg et al., 2009).

Coprolites

Occasional fragments of carnivore coprolites are present, but rare, in the DRS sediments. Fragments of carnivore coprolites are
phosphate rich and exhibit fur pseudomorphs and gas bubbles (Horwitz and Goldberg, 1989).

Bone

Bone fragments are numerous throughout the DRS sequence, and range from sand-sized fragments to pieces several centimeters in
width. Most of the bones appear burnt, and some appear recrystallized as a result of diagenetic processes. The high degree of
fragmentation of bones at DRS appears to be the result of trampling (Miller et al., 2009) and also of secondary mineral formation
(mostly gypsum) within the bone structure. A single burnt ﬁsh bone was also identiﬁed in thin section.

Eggshell

Ostrich eggshell is relatively numerous in thin section, and can be identiﬁed by the palisade of calcite crystals oriented perpendicular
to the outer wall of the eggshell surface. Most of the ostrich eggshell is well preserved, although some fragments are partially
dissolved, particularly in MF units that appear largely decalciﬁed. Some fragments of ostrich eggshell have been fragmented by
secondary growth of gypsum crystals within the shell.

visible, but plaquettes (typically 1e5 cm in width) and other coarse
components are oriented horizontally. Nina is particularly ashy
(2.5 YR 6/2, light brownish gray) and forms a wedge that abuts a
large (20 cm wide) block of quartzitic sandstone that partially deﬁnes the base of excavation. Angular fragments of bone are present
and appear very white in the ﬁeld, possibly calcined. There are
several old krotovinas within this LU, suggesting that it has been
inﬂuenced by bioturbation in the past.
MF units classiﬁed as MF types “coarse, heterogenousdsand”
(MF type 1a), “microgranular” (MF type 3), and “ash” (MF type 5)
are present within LU 1. The lowermost MF unit in LU 1 is represented by MF type 1a. Here the interstitial space between the

quartz sand grains is ﬁlled with organic silt. Calcareous ashes are
present and generally well preserved, although it appears locally
decalciﬁed in places. Rounded fragments of charcoal and subrounded fragments of burnt bone are evenly distributed
throughout the MF unit. Ostrich eggshell fragments (Texier et al.,
2013) and a mussel shell fragment (Steele and Klein, 2013) are
visible in thin section. The lowermost MF unit grades into an
overlying unit of MF type 5, which contains fresh calcareous ashes
that are partially cemented in places. The base of this unit is deﬁned
by a cm-thick concentration of rounded charcoal fragments. In
addition to localized zones of partially dissolved ashes, LU 1 contains secondary minerals, including nitratite and gypsum; the latter

3438

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Table 3
List of MF types identiﬁed at DRS, with correlation to microfacies identiﬁed at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009), and genetic interpretations of the MF types.
MF type #

MF type name

Corresponding MF
type at Sibudu

Description

Genetic interpretation

1

Coarse, heterogenous

5

Trampled

1a

Coarse, heterogenousd
sand

7

1b

Coarse, heterogenousd
organic silt
Coarse, heterogenousd
charcoal

N/A

MF type 1 consists of a heterogenous mixture of sand-sized grains of quartz,
charcoal, humiﬁed organic material, organic silt, burnt bone (both sandsized and larger), and occasionally ashes. The components are typically subangular to sub-rounded, and are mostly sand-sized, although they can range
from silt-sized to cm-sized. Larger fragments of bone, charcoal, ostrich
eggshell, and plaquettes can be present, and usually exhibit a horizontal
orientation. Some larger fragments of bone have sparry calcite attached to
them, which in some instances is partially dissolved or partially replaced by
gypsum. Bedding structures are absent, apart from occasional, weak
grading. Following Stoops (2003), the c/f-related distribution could be
called “enaulic” (mostly single-spaced equal enaulic), with organic
fragments and aggregates interspersed within the pore space between the
sand grains. Occasional zones of secondary minerals, usually gypsum, are
present in this MF type as well.
In MF type 1a sand-sized grains of quartz are present in higher percentages
(40e50%) than in other occurrences of this microfacies type. Other
components are present, including charcoal, humiﬁed organic material,
organic silt, and calcareous ashes. Using Stoops’ terminology (Stoops, 2003),
this MF type would have a “close ﬁne enaulic” c/f related distribution.
MF type 1b is marked by a higher proportion of organic silt than other
occurrences of MF type 1.
MF type 1c is marked by a higher proportion of charcoal, relative to the
occurrence of other sedimentary components. The larger charcoal
fragments are typically sub-rounded.
MF type 2 is characterized by a high proportion of coarse material (larger
than 1 cm). This may include quartzite fragments, plaquettes, bone, or
charcoal. The charcoal fragments typically appear rounded in this MF type.
The coarse components are usually horizontally oriented, and are included
within ﬁner material that resembles MF type 1 (heterogenous mixture of
sand-sized quartz grains, charcoal, organic silt, etc.). No clear sedimentary
structures are visible in this MF type.
MF type 3 exhibits a microgranular structure and is ﬁner grained than other
MF types. The components are silt-sized microgranules of humiﬁed organic
material, silt-sized fragments of charcoal, ﬁne-sand-sized fragments of
burnt bone, and silt-and sand-sized grains of quartz. Authigenic minerals
are common (gypsum or phosphates). This MF type is usually very thin (less
than 2 mm).
MF type 4 is composed largely of angular to sub-angular fragments of
charcoal and burnt bone, with a loose, chaotic, structural organization.
Other combustion-derived residues are present, most notably fat-derived
char. Sand-sized grains of quartz are present, but in much lower quantities
than other MF types.
MF type 5 is dominated by fresh, calcareous pseudomorphs after calcium
oxalate crystals or other ash-derived materials. Burnt bone, occasional
charcoal, sand-sized grains of quartz, and combustion-derived residues
make up the minor components of this MF type. Articulated ashes (Mentzer,
2012) are also present.
In MF type 5a the ashes are partially to fully cemented by calcite. They often
contain articulated ashes.
In MF type 5b the ashes appear partially to completely dissolved. At DRS the
ashes are rarely phosphatized, but occasionally dissolved. The remaining
ash residues are typically siliceous, as described at other Paleolithic cave
sites such as Kebara and Hayonim (Schiegl et al., 1994; Weiner et al., 1995,
2002)
Some ash-rich MF units at DRS also include a high proportion of coarse
components, including rounded to sub-rounded fragments of charcoal. This
MF type often appears more open in structure, and the ashes are typically
decalciﬁed.
MF type 6 is largely composed of articulated phytoliths within a calcareous
matrix. Occasional sand-sized grains of quartz and charcoal are present, but
rare. The phytoliths are typically laminated. Laminated phytolith-rich MF
units have been described at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009; Wadley et al.,
2011; Miller and Sievers, 2012), and other sites (Cabanes et al., 2010).
MF type 7 is characterized by a dominance of ﬁbrous charcoal that is
microlaminated. The charcoal is occasionally contained within a calcareous
matrix, with a few sand-sized grains of quartz.

1c

N/A

2

Coarse

N/A

3

Microgranular

N/A

4

Charcoal

3

5

Ash

6

5a

Cemented ash

N/A

5b

Dissolved ash

N/A

5c

Ash with rounded
components

N/A

6

Phytoliths

4

7

Laminated ﬁbrous
charcoal

2

is present as microcrystalline nodules that displace the surrounding material.
Above the ash-rich unit, LU1 exhibits multiple MF units, typically 1e2 cm thick. These units can be classiﬁed as MF type 1a, and

Trampled

Trampled
Trampled

Trampled (?)

Trampled surface

Hearth base

Hearth top

Hearth top
Hearth top

Reworked ashes
(dumped or raked out)

Burnt bedding (top)

Burnt bedding (base)

each is capped with a thin (3e4 mm) MF unit of organic silt, which
can be classiﬁed as MF type 3 (microgranular). The cyclical alternation between MF types 1b and 3 gives a clearly layered appearance to the upper portion of LU1 and demonstrates that the SUs

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

represent multiple depositional episodes (Fig. 7). The repeated
occurrence of MF type 3 on top of coarser-grained MF units is a
pattern continued in LU 2.
3.4.2. Lithostratigraphic unit 2
LU 2 is the thickest LU at DRS, approximately 150 cm and spans
SUs Miles to Joy. This LU also spans several technological subdivisions within the sequence, including MSA-Mike, pre-SB-Lynn,
the SB, the Early HP, and MSA-Jack. This LU is distinguished by MF
units of reddish brown sandy silt (ranging in color from 5 YR 2.5/2
to 10 YR 3/4) interspersed with MF units of charcoal and ash,
typically several cms in thickness and less than 1 m in extent. The
ashy MF unit typically overlies the charcoal MF unit.
MF units classiﬁed as MF types “coarse-heterogenous” (MF type
1), “coarse” (MF type 2), “microgranular” (MF type 3), “charcoal”
(MF type 4), “ash” (MF type 5), and “laminated ﬁbrous charcoal”
(MF type 7) are present in LU 2. At the base of LU 2, we see an increase in the presence of charcoal within the matrix, particularly
manifesting in MF types 1c and 4. However, the frequency of
charcoal within the individual MF units below SU Mike is less than
that found in the rest of LU2. Individual MF units below Mike in LU2
and LU1, corresponding to SUs Noel through Mark, are largely
dominated by MF type 1, although an ashy MF unit (MF type 5) and
another unit composed of laminated ﬁbrous charcoal (MF type 7)
were identiﬁed within SUs Maggie and Miles. The individual MF
units in LU 2 below Mike, as elsewhere, are typically 2e5 cm thick.
Although composed of the same components, and falling into
roughly the same MF type classiﬁcation, the individual MF units are
clearly distinguished from one another based on slight variations in
grain size and proportions of components. Charcoal in these MF
units is largely rounded and is typically no larger than 5 mm in
diameter. Burnt bone is common, but fragmented, with some
showing evidence of being crushed in place (Miller et al., 2009).
An ashy MF unit found in thin section (Sample DRS-08-13, SUs
Maggie and Miles) is partially cemented (MF type 5a) and locally
decalciﬁed (MF type 5b) and has a sharp, irregular contact with the
overlying MF unit, suggesting some limited physical erosion. The
ashy MF unit contains numerous burnt bone fragments, as well as a
1 cm sized fragment of hematite. Although partially cemented, the
individual ash rhombs are still clearly visible. In places the ashes
have recrystallized to form sparry coatings around the burnt bone
fragments, including in areas of the ashy MF unit that have been
decalciﬁed (Fig. 8). Calcareous ashes are virtually absent from other
MF units in LU 2 below Mike.
SU Mike marks a slight change in LU 2. In the ﬁeld, Mike
occurred as a distinct, 5-cm-thick SU composed largely of
horizontally-oriented coarse (ca. 5 cm long) bone fragments, lithic
artifacts, quartzite éboulis, and individual fragments of charcoal. In
places, Mike appeared clast supported, although some ﬁne material
(sandy silt) was locally present. In thin section, Mike is also distinct
and contains numerous coarse components, including burnt bone,
quartzite éboulis, charcoal, partially decalciﬁed ostrich eggshell
fragments, and a fragment of burnt coprolite. The bone fragments
are mostly angular and exhibit a sparry calcareous coating, similar
to what was seen in the ashy MF unit in SU Maggie/Miles. Charcoal
fragments are also angular to sub-angular. Some of the quartz
éboulis exhibit cappings of microgranules, suggesting some
downward movement of material, possibly as a result of sifting of
dry material through the clast-supported matrix.
Above SU Mike, LU 2 develops a repetitive pattern of MF types.
MF type 1 (coarse, heterogenous) is typically capped by a thin
(several mm thick) MF unit of MF type 3 (microgranular), which in
turn is often capped by a couplet of MF type 4 (charcoal) and MF
type 5 (ash). The repetition of MF types 1,3,4, and 5 reﬂects the ﬁeld
observations that LU 2 consists of layers of reddish-brown, organic-

3439

rich sandy silts, interspersed with lenses of charcoal and ash. The
micromorphological analysis shows that the reddish-brown sandy
silts, which appear relatively homogenous in the ﬁeld, are actually
composed of numerous, horizontal-lying, individual MF units. A
typical example of the microfacies succession in LU2 is seen in
sample DRS-08-09, corresponding to SUs Kate, Julia, Jess (early HP,
Porraz et al., 2013) (Fig. 9).
MF units dominated by ash (MF type 5) are relatively common in
LU2, and are occasionally associated with an underlying MF unit
composed largely of charcoal (MF type 4). Most of the ashes in LU2,
however, show some signs of post-depositional chemical alteration,
either in the form of recrystallization, cementation, or partial or
complete decalciﬁcation. Often the same ashy MF unit contains
zones exhibiting various states of calcite preservation. Typically, the
calcite is better preserved at the top of the ashy MF unit, where in
some cases the ashes have formed a cemented crust (Fig. 8C and D).
In other instances, all of the ashes exhibit some degree of decalciﬁcation, but the ashes toward the top of the MF unit appear better
preserved than those at the base. Burnt bone, articulated ashes
(Mentzer, 2012), and fragments of charcoal (sometimes well
rounded) are present in many of the ashy MF units. For several of
the ashy MF units, the cemented crusts appear fragmented and
physically eroded.
Units of MF type 1 in LU 2 resemble those found in LU 1, but
generally contain more charcoal (MF type 1c). Individual examples
of MF type 1 in LU 2 are typically separated from one another by MF
units classiﬁed as MF types 4 and 5. When not separated by these MF
units of charcoal and ash, stacked MF units of MF type 1 are typically
separated from one another by MF type 3 (microgranular) or are
easily distinguished from one another by variations in their components. For example, sample DRS-08-10, which corresponds to SUs
Logan through Kim (SB), does not contain any charcoal-rich or ashy
MF units. However, at least six distinct individual MF units are visible
in this sequence, mostly categorized as MF types 1 or 3 (Fig. 10).
3.4.3. Lithostratigraphic unit 3
LU 3 corresponds to SUs Jeff and John (Intermediate HP, Porraz
et al., 2013) and forms a distinct break in the types of deposits
found in the DRS sequence. In the ﬁeld it appears generally homogenous, ca. 15e20 cm thick, and is composed of reddish-brown
(5 YR 2.5/2) sandy, organic silt. Charcoal and ash lenses are absent
from the LU, and coarse components, such as plaquettes, éboulis,
and large bone fragments are fewer than in other LUs. The most
striking characteristic of the unit, apart from the absence of obvious
combustion features, is the dominance of authigenic minerals.
Although present in all LUs, white (gypsum) and yellow (phosphate) ﬂecks and nodules permeate LU 3 and locally deﬁne multiple surfaces within the unit.
In thin section, LU 3 is composed of a stacked sequence of MF
types “coarse, heterogenous (MF type 1) and “microgranular” (MF
type 3), similar to portions of the sequence in LUs 2 and 1. Where
sampled, LU 3 rests directly on a MF unit of cemented ashes that
have been physically eroded (Fig. 11). Here, the examples of MF Type
1 contain a higher proportion of organic silt and humiﬁed organic
material relative to the charcoal-rich LU 2, broadly resembling LU 1.
However, unlike LU 1, the MF units in LU 3 have similar proportions
of sand grains as in LU 2. Charcoal fragments, usually no larger than
8 mm, are sub-rounded to rounded. As noted in the ﬁeld, all MF units
in LU3 are permeated with authigenic minerals, including gypsum
nodules, phosphate nodules, and clumps of nitrate minerals.
3.4.4. Lithostratigraphic unit 4
LU 4 forms the upper 90 cm of the sequence at DRS, including
SUs Governor through Denzil in the Main Sector and corresponds
with the Intermediate HP, the Late HP, and the post-HP

3440

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Fig. 5. Photomicrographs of the different MF types (see Table 2). A) MF type 1 (coarse heterogenous). PPL. Fragments of burnt bone (bb), charcoal (cc) and sand-sized grains of
quartz (q). B) MF type 1a (coarse, heterogenousdsand). PPL. Sand-sized grains of quartz (q). C) MF type 1b (coarse, heterogenousdorganic silt). PPL. Sand-sized grains of quartz (q),
organic material (om). D) MF type 1c (coarse, heterogenousdcharcoal). PPL. Fragments of charcoal (cc), sand-sized grains of quartz (q). E) MF type 2 (coarse). PPL. Plaquettes of
quartzite (qz), fragments of charcoal (cc). F) MF type 3 (microgranular). PPL. Sand-sized grains of quartz (q), microgranules of organic material (m). G) MF type 4 (charcoal). PPL.
Fragments of charcoal (cc). H) MF type 5 (ash). XPL. Fresh-appearing rhombs of micritic calcite, or ash (a). I) MF type 5a (cemented ashes). XPL. Cemented ashes (a), sand-sized grain
of quartz (q). J) MF type 5b (dissolved ashes). PPL. Sand-sized grain of quartz (q), fragment of burnt bone (bb), dissolved ashes (da). K) MF type 5c (ashes with rounded charcoal). PPL.
Rounded fragment of charcoal (cc), Sand-sized grains of quartz (q). L) MF type 6 (phytoliths). PPL. Fragment of burnt bone (bb), sand-sized grains of quartz (q), laminated phytoliths
(p). M) MF type 7 (laminated ﬁbrous charcoal). PPL. Fibrous charcoal (fc).

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3441

Fig. 5. (continued).

technocomplexes (Porraz et al., 2013). In the ﬁeld, LU 4 appears
markedly different from the other LUs, exhibiting a “layer-cake”
stratigraphy of beds, lenses and laminations of charcoal and ash
(some strongly cemented) directly on top of one another. Some of
the ashy deposits, while only a few cm thick, extend across the entire
excavated area (e.g., SU Frank), whereas other ash and charcoal MF
units appear intrusive within the underlying units, resembling en
cuvette hearths. Other MF units within the sequence are clearly
laminated (laminae < 1 cm thick) and resemble units described in
the post-HP sequence at Sibudu where they were interpreted as the
remains of burnt bedding (Goldberg et al., 2009; Wadley et al., 2011).
Superﬁcially, LU 4 at DRS resembles the post-HP layers at Sibudu and
other stacked combustion feature sites, such as Kebara, Israel
(Goldberg and Bar-Yosef, 1998) and Klasies River, South Africa
(Singer and Wymer, 1982). LU 4 has been exposed across much of the
excavated portion of the site, allowing for a more detailed look at
spatial variation in the deposits. In the Main Sector, SUs of LU 4 are
relatively horizontal. However, in the Back Sector and Trench
(Parkington et al., 2013), the MF units dip slightly to the south (into
the shelter), which explains the presence of thicker post-HP deposits
in the Trench relative to the rest of the site. The upper portion of LU 4
appears erosional, since many of the slightly dipping SUs in the

trench are truncated. This erosional contact corresponds to a break
of about 40 ka between the post-HP deposits and the overlying LSA
deposits. The erosional contact at the top of the DRS sequence is
strongly cemented by halite and potassium nitrate (niter). The niter
crust also extends along the outside of a large boulder that extends
from the surface to the base of excavations within squares K-L6. Most
of the LSA deposits were removed during excavations in the 1970s,
although several LSA pits e which were dug into LU 4 e remain,
making stratigraphic correlations of this upper unit across the site
difﬁcult (Parkington et al., 2013).
In thin section, LU 4 is very distinct from the other LUs at DRS.
MF type 1 (coarse, heterogenous) is present, and usually dominated
by MF type 1c (coarse, heterogenousdcharcoal), reﬂecting the ﬁeld
observation that LU 4 contains a signiﬁcantly higher proportion of
charcoal compared to underlying units. The charcoal fragments in
LU 4 appear less rounded than in the underlying LUs, and are
predominantly ﬁbrous, rather than woody charcoal. Burnt bones
are numerous, and some show signs of having been crushed in
place (Miller et al., 2009), indicating trampling. Ashy MF units (MF
type 5) are numerous, generally well-preserved, and contain articulated ashes. Laminated fragments of ﬁbrous charcoal (MF type 7)
are present and are associated with an overlying MF unit of

3442

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

the interpretation of depositional and post-depositional processes
that led to their formation. It is these associations of MF types,
along with analogy to other sites (e.g., Sibudu), that form the basis
for the following interpretations.

Fig. 6. Field photograph of the Main Sector (here, M6/7 and N6/7) showing LUs 2e4.
LU 1 is at the base of the Main Sector and not shown here. LU 2 is marked by layers of
reddish-brown sandy silt interspersed with lenses of charcoal and ash. LU 3 is a homogenous layer of reddish brown sandy silt, without any obvious combustion features.
It is also interspersed with numerous nodules of secondary minerals (mostly gypsum
and phosphate). LU 4 contains a palimpsest of ashy and charcoal-rich lenses. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

laminated phytoliths (MF type 6)dthe ﬁrst occurrence of this MF
type within the DRS sequence. Strikingly absent from LU 4 are any
units of MF type 3 (microgranular). In general, the individual MF
units within LU 4 appear more compact than in the underlying LUs.
A typical example of the sequence of MF types in LU4 is found in
sample DRS-08-05, corresponding to SUs Fox through Fred (Intermediate HP), and illustrated in (Fig. 12).
4. Discussion
4.1. Genetic interpretation of MF types and associations
At DRS we were able to identify seven major MF types, along
with several subdivisions. Many of the MF types co-occur, aiding in

4.1.1. Trampled deposits (MF types 1 and 3)
MF types 1 and 3 are commonly associated with one another
throughout the DRS sequence. Macroscopically, this microfacies association appears as the reddish-brown sandy silty units common in
LUs 1e3. In this microfacies association, the coarse, heterogenous
microfacies (MF type 1) is overlain by the microgranular microfacies
(MF type 3). In addition to sand-sized grains of quartz, organic silt,
humiﬁed organic material and other components, MF type 1 always
contains some components that were derived from anthropogenic
combustion features including ash, charcoal, and burnt bone, as well
as burnt bone with sparry calcite coatings. These anthropogenic
components exhibit some degree of rounding, often to an extreme
degree. The rounding of these burnt components, as well as their
intimate association with nonburnt components, demonstrates that
the components of MF type 1 have been redistributed from hearths
or other combustion features that are no longer intact. The likely
process for the redistribution of these components is trampling. MF
type 1 is poorly sorted and exhibits no grading or bedding, thus
ruling out ﬂowing water (cf. Lenoble, 2003) or wind as possible
depositional agents. Bioturbation could produce a similar looking
microfacies; however, the examples of MF type 1 at DRS are only a
few cm thick and exhibit clear horizontal orientation across the
proﬁle. Extensive bioturbation would have homogenized the deposits and destroyed the stacking of the individual MF units clearly
visible in thin section and in the ﬁeld. Colluviation could also produce a similar-looking microfacies; however, the SUs at DRS are
more or less horizontal, and there is no obvious up-slope source for
the sediments since the shelter is located at the top of a koppie.
Therefore, it seems likely that although MF type 1 contains anthropogenic, biogenic, and geogenic components, the formation of this
microfacies was largely through the effects of human trampling.
The association of MF type 1 with MF type 3 supports the
trampling hypothesis. Although a microgranular structure is
commonly associated with bioturbation (Stoops, 2003; Courty
et al., 1989), the fact that MF type 3 is always horizontally oriented, is always expressed as a thin, mm-thick capping on top of MF
type 1, and never cross cuts other MF units, suggests that it is not
the result of burrowing animals. Rather, Rentzel and Narten (2000)
have shown through laboratory experiments that microgranular
structures form in the upper 3 mm of dry sediments that have
undergone repeated trampling. MF type 3 at DRS ﬁts well with
these experimental results and suggests that this MF type represents a stable surface that was exposed to trampling (Fig. 13A).
Authigenic minerals, speciﬁcally mm-sized nodules of gypsum
and secondary phosphates, are often concentrated within MF type

Fig. 7. Flat-bed scan of sample DRS-08-14 (LU1, SU Mary) with MF units indicated, along with MF types, and microfacies associations and interpretations. In LU 1, we see MF type 1a
capped by MF type 3 and interpret these microfacies associations as trampled deposits with trampled surfaces. Note that part of the sample was destroyed during collection.

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3443

Fig. 8. Photomicrographs of altered ashes. A) DRS-08-10c, XPL. Fragment of burnt bone (bb), ash-rhombs (a), sparry calcite, and gypsum (g). Fragments of burnt bone often have
sparry calcite coatings. Here, we see that the spar is forming from calcareous ashes, and that the spar in turn is being replaced by gypsum. B) DRS-08-12b, XPL. Fragment of burnt
bone (bb) coated with sparry calcite (c). Note that the spar appears partially dissolved. C) DRS-08-7b, PPL. Ashes within a hearth. The ashes above are cemented (ca), and the ashes
below are dissolved (da). Similar crusts of cemented ashes are commonly found on top of dissolved ashes in the hearths of DRS, particularly in LU 2. D) Same view as (C), but in XPL.

3 (Fig. 13B). The presence of these minerals within the surface MF
units suggests that there was little vertical transport of water
through the DRS sequence. Today, water from precipitation does
not directly reach the surface of the deposits at DRS (personal
observation), and a possible source of moisture is water which
percolated through cracks within the quartzite of the shelter.
However, the presence of highly soluble nitrates within the cracks
suggests that the volume of water moving through the shelter
bedrock is not very high. Another possible source for moisture
within the shelter is dew or fog which could have wetted the upper
mm of the deposits, leaving the underlying portion dry. Today, fog
can be observed within the Verlorenvlei valley. Similarly, on colder
days, dew can form within the shelter. The repeated wetting of the
surface by dew or fog would have provided enough moisture to
precipitate secondary minerals, but would not have provided
enough moisture to ﬂush out soluble ions.
MF type 1, MF type 3, and their direct association suggest that
they were formed by trampling. It is interesting to note that the same
process has formed two distinct microfacies: one (MF type 1) formed
through horizontal displacement of sedimentary components and
another (MF type 3) formed by the modiﬁcation of a relatively stable
surface. Experiments and micromorphological studies (Rentzel and
Narten, 2000; Miller et al., 2009) have shown that the results of
trampling can be expressed differently, based on a number of variables, including substrate type, moisture content, and duration of
trampling. These studies have also shown that repeated trampling
can create horizonation within a deposit (Gé et al., 1993; Rentzel and
Narten, 2000), similar to what we see at DRS. However, it is not clear
how or why the trampling at DRS shifted from a process of horizontal
displacement to one that only altered an existing surface. The
horizonation seen at DRS may be a result of changes in the intensity
of trampling, or may represent a natural progression in the development and formation of a deposit that is repeatedly trampled.

Future experiments at DRS will hopefully clarify the details of the
effects of trampling on the deposits and future excavations will
provide more lateral exposures which should help document the
original sources of horizontally displaced combusted materials.
4.1.2. Hearths (MF types 4 and 5)
Ashy MF units at DRS are commonly, but not exclusively, associated with an underlying MF unit of coarse sub-angular charcoal
that can also contain burnt bone fragments. This type of conﬁguration is typical for combustion featuresdparticularly hearths
(Mentzer, 2012; Goldberg et al., 2009; Berna and Goldberg, 2008).
We can distinguish between charcoal-rich MF units directly associated with hearths and charcoal-rich MF units associated with
trampling (MF type 1c) based on several key characteristics. First,
charcoal (along with burnt bone) within MF type 1c is typically
well-rounded. And second, MF type 1c usually contains a much
higher proportion of sand-size quartz grains than does MF type 4.
There are several instances in the DRS sequence where an ashy MF
unit directly overlies a charcoal-rich MF unit of MF type 1c. However, the charcoal and ash in these instances do not have a direct
genetic relationship (Mallol et al., 2012) since the charcoal-rich MF
units contain a notably higher proportion of sand-sized quartz
grains than the ashy MF units. Therefore, not all combustion features at DRS have a charcoal-rich base. Also notably absent from the
hearths at DRS are rubiﬁed bases, which are common at Sibudu
(Goldberg et al., 2009). However, hearths do not always exhibit
rubiﬁcation (Mentzer, 2012), either as a result of lower burning
temperatures, shorter burning time, or a lack of material that can be
rubiﬁed (Canti and Linford, 2000). Based on the high proportion of
sand-sized quartz grains and organic material within most of the
DRS sediments, we conclude that the lack of rubiﬁcation is likely
related to a lack of ferruginous material within the substrate that
can be rubiﬁed.

3444

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Fig. 9. Flat-bed scan of sample DRS-08-09 (LU 2, SUs Keegan and Kenny), with MF units indicated, along with MF types, and microfacies associations and interpretations. Here, the
base of the sequence is represented by a unit of MF type 1 (coarse, heterogeneous), that contains horizontally oriented plaquettes and burnt bone, within a matrix of sand, organic
silt, and humiﬁed organic material. This MF unit grades into an overlying unit of MF type 3 (microgranular), that is composed of granules of organic silt and is interspersed with
nodules (1 mm in size) of ﬁnely crystalline gypsum. Resting conformably on MF type 3 is a 2-cm-thick MF unit composed of angular to sub-angular fragments of charcoal and burnt
bone (MF type 4) which grades into a 1-cm thick ashy MF unit that is largely decalciﬁed (MF type 5b). Some burnt bones with sparry calcite coatings are present in the ashy MF unit.
The ashes in the top of this MF unit appear more calcareous than in the base of the unit and they also contain numerous gypsum nodules. Resting directly on this MF unit is another
unit (5-mm thick) of charcoal (MF type 4) which also grades into a 1-cm thick unit of partially decalciﬁed ashes (MF type 5b) that contains numerous gypsum nodules. Overlying
this ashy MF unit is a unit of MF type 1, which is capped by MF type 3.

Hearth structures can be clearly identiﬁed within the ﬁeld in LU
2, where they are typically several cm thick, less than a m across,
and separated from one another by layers of reddish-brown sandy
silt. Hearth structures are also present in LU 4, although they are
difﬁcult to identify in the ﬁeld since LU 4 is dominated by MF units
with large proportions of combusted material, much of it reworked.
It is only through microfacies analysis that individual, distinct
combustion features can be identiﬁed in LU 4. While burnt components are present in LU 1 and LU 3, there are no clear hearth
structures in either of these lithostratigraphic units.
Ashes are generally well preserved within the combustion features. One interesting characteristic of many of the hearths at DRS,
particularly within LU 2, is that they often exhibit a cemented
carbonate crust which overlies partially dissolved ashes. At ﬁrst,
this seems counterintuitive, since the surface of the ash would
presumably be exposed to more post-depositional alteration
processes than the base. However, considering the evidence that
most soil moisture at DRS was focused in the upper mm or cm of
the deposits, we can develop a model that explains the cementation
and dissolution processes of hearth ash at DRS. After abandonment
of a hearth, the upper ashes were probably exposed to surface
moisture (dew or fog), which initially e and rapidly-formed a
cemented, calcareous crust. Once the crust formed it trapped

moisture below it which would have been in contact with more
organic material and would have led to more acidic conditions. This
would have eventually led to the partial or complete dissolution of
ashes below the crust. Because of the cementation, the calcareous
crust was more resistant to dissolution than the non-cemented
ashes below, leaving behind a relatively well-preserved crust over
dissolved ashes. Some of the ashy MF units at DRS exhibit other
evidence for recrystallization of calcareous ashes. Some of the burnt
bone in the ashy MF units exhibit sparry coatings of calcite. As with
the formation of the calcareous crusts, these coating likely formed
as minimal amounts of moisture from dew or fog accumulated
around the bones. Sometimes these bones with sparry coatings are
found outside of combustion features, within MF type 1, suggesting
that they were reworked from cemented hearths. Many of the
calcareous crusts at DRS are partially fragmented and show signs of
physical modiﬁcation. A likely scenario, based on the formation
processes of MF types 1 and 3, is that the cemented hearths were
partially eroded by trampling.
4.1.3. Reworked ash (MF type 5c)
Not all of the ashy MF units within the DRS sequence are directly
associated with intact hearths. Some of the ashy MF units contain
rounded charcoal fragments that are intimately mixed with the ash.

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3445

Fig. 10. Flat-bed scan of sample DRS-08-10 (LU 2, SUs Logan, Larry and Kim), with MF units indicated, along with MF types, and microfacies associations and interpretations. The
base of the sequence, corresponding to SU Logan, is a 7 cm-thick example of MF1 that contains some larger, coarser fragments of burnt bone (ca. 2 cm) that do not exhibit any
preferential orientation. This MF unit also contains articulated ashes, some of which appear partially dissolved; and partially dissolved ostrich eggshell fragments. mm-sized
gypsum nodules are also present. This MF unit is capped by another unit that we categorize as MF type 1c, that is only 1 cm thick, and contains numerous fragments of
rounded to sub-rounded charcoal and burnt bone. As in the underlying MF unit, the ﬁne matrix here contains calcite in the form of individual and articulated ashes, as well as sparry
coatings around burnt bone. This MF unit is in turn overlain by a unit of MF type 1 that lacks the coarser fraction found in the underlying MF unit. Here, calcite is more poorly
preserved than below, although ostrich eggshell fragments are present. This MF unit corresponds with the lower portion of SU Larry and is capped by a 1-mm thick unit of MF type 3
that contains secondary phosphate nodules. On top of this example of MF type 3 is another unit of MF type 1, roughly similar to that below, and ca. 7 cm thick. The top of this MF
unit appears more charcoal rich and contains numerous gypsum nodules, some almost 1 cm in size that were clearly visible in the ﬁeld. The top of this MF unit marks the top of SU
unit Larry. Overlying this is another unit of MF type 1, similar to below, which is again capped by MF type 3.

These ashes often lack the cemented crusts that are typical of DRS
hearths, and are more often completely decalciﬁed and composed
of siliceous material. Furthermore, these ashes exhibit more void
space compared to the ashes found in hearths, and also contain a
higher proportion of components not directly related to combustion. In the ﬁeld, these ash deposits are often continuous across the
area of excavation. In contrast, hearths are limited in horizontal
extent and appear in proﬁle as distinct lenses. Similar occurrences

of this MF type were identiﬁed at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009) and
interpreted as ash dumps.
4.1.4. Burnt bedding (MF types 6 and 7)
A distinct microfacies association found only in LU 4 is laminated ﬁbrous charcoal (MF type 7) overlain by laminated, articulated phytoliths (MF type 6). This microfacies association was
described in detail at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009; Wadley et al.,

3446

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Fig. 11. Flat-bed scan of sample DRS-08-07 (LUs 2 and 3, SUs Joy and Jeff), with MF units indicated, along with MF types, and microfacies associations and interpretations. Here, LU 2
is expressed as a trampled MF unit (MF type 1c) overlain by a MF unit of altered ashes (MF type 5b), which likely represents an intact hearth. Note the erosional contact on the
surface of the ashes, which is typical for hearths within LU 2. LU 3 is expressed here as a series of MF type 1b and MF type 3, typical of trampled deposits at DRS. Also note the lower
proportion of charcoal within the individual MF units in LU 3 relative to those in MF 1.

2011) where it was interpreted as the remains of burnt bedding. At
Sibudu, this microfacies association occurs frequently, and forms a
signiﬁcant part of the post-HP deposits. At DRS, only one clear
example of burnt bedding could be identiﬁed in thin section
within the Intermediate HP (SU Fred). However, ﬁeld observations
of LU 4 outside of the sampling area revealed several laminations
similar to those found at Sibudu, suggesting that bedding construction was more prevalent than suggested by the present
samples reported here. It is not clear what plants were used for
the construction of bedding, although sedges, which were used at
Sibudu (Sievers and Muasya, 2011; Wadley et al., 2011), have been
identiﬁed (Cartwright, 2013). The laminated, articulated phytoliths
at DRS are intimately associated with calcareous ashes, which is
not the case at Sibudu. Experiments at Sibudu showed that
calcareous ashes were not produced in large volumes by the
burning of sedge or grass bedding (Miller and Sievers, 2012),
suggesting that a different type of plant may have been used at
DRS. This result is not unexpected, given the different ecological
settings of the two sites. Future geoarchaeological and archaeobotanical research at DRS will aim to clarify the use of speciﬁc
plants for bedding and combustion.
4.2. Formation models for the lithostratigraphic units
A schematic illustration of common microfacies associations in
the different LUs is provided in Fig. 14. Below, we present site formation models for the different LUs.

4.2.1. LU 1
The lowermost LU at DRS has the highest proportion of geogenic
components in the form of sand- and silt-sized grains of quartz. MF
type 1 in LU 1 contains little anthropogenic material (charcoal and
burnt bone) compared to overlying LUs. The minimal anthropogenic
input in LU 1 corresponds with a lower density of lithic artifacts
within these deposits (Porraz et al., 2013). However, there is evidence within the sediments for human presence, including a wellpreserved combustion feature. Furthermore, despite the primarily
geogenic origin of the deposits within LU 1, the individual MF units
exhibit modiﬁcation through trampling, in the form of multiple,
repeated occurrences of microgranular surfaces.
LU 1 formed through a gradual accumulation of geogenic and
biogenic components. Sand- and silt-sized grains of quartz were
deposited through disaggregation of the shelter walls, likely as a
result of salt-induced spalling, a process we can still observe
today. The organic silt and humiﬁed organic fraction in LU 1
ultimately is derived from vegetation outside of the shelter, and
was brought to the site either by wind, animals, or humans.
Some of the ﬁnely comminuted organic material may come from
disaggregated herbivore coprolites (e.g., rock hyrax or baboon)
as suggested by the presence of primary phosphatic material
with some of the humiﬁed organic material. It is also possible
that humans played a role in the accumulation of some of the
organic silt and humiﬁed organic material; however, it is likely
that all three agents (human, animal, wind) contributed to the
accumulation. Once accumulated, the sand-sized grains of quartz

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

3447

Fig. 12. Flat-bed scan of sample DRS-08-05 (LU 4, SUs Fox, Fannie, Frank and Fred), with MF units indicated, along with MF types, and microfacies associations and interpretations.
The base of the sample contains a charcoal-rich MF unit (MF type 1c) that is capped by a 2 cm thick ashy MF unit (MF type 5) that is partially decalciﬁed at the base, and cemented at
the top. This sequence is overlain by a 1.5 cm thick unit of MF type 1c that also contains numerous, individual ash rhombs intimately mixed within the matrix. This MF unit contains
relatively more sand-sized grains of quartz than units of MF types 5 and 4 in underlying LUs. Above these units is an ashy MF unit (MF type 5c) that is not cemented and contains
more coarse material than the underlying example of MF type 5, including plaquettes, bunt bone, and sub-angular pieces of charcoal. This in turn, is overlain by a thin (0.5 cm) MF
unit of MF type 1c, very similar in appearance to the underlying unit of the same MF type. Above this we observe a thin MF unit of partially decalciﬁed ash (MF type 5a) and a 3-cm
thick unit of MF type 1c that is capped by 0.5-cm thick unit of laminated ﬁbrous charcoal (MF type 7). At the top is a MF unit of laminated, articulated phytoliths (MF type 6) within a
calcareous matrix.

and humiﬁed organic material were modiﬁed by repeated
trampling, which formed microgranular surfaces on the individual MF units.
4.2.2. LU 2
The transition from LU 1 to LU 2 is gradual and marked by
an increase in anthropogenic input. The same depositional and
post-depositional processes acting in LU 1 also inﬂuenced the

formation of LU 2; however, we see a signiﬁcant increase in the
abundance of anthropogenic components and a corresponding
decrease in geogenic components in the form of sand-sized quartz
grains. Combustion features, in the form of charcoal and ash lenses,
are also numerous, although the presence of charcoal, burnt bone,
and other combustion-derived residues within trampled MF units
suggests that there were once many more hearths in LU 2 than are
visible today (Schiegl and Conard, 2006).

Fig. 13. Photomicrograph of characteristics of surfaces at DRS. A) DRS-08-7a, PPL. Two coarse MF units (MF type 1) (c) separated by a microgranular MF unit (MF type 3) (m). These
thin, microgranular surfaces are found throughout LUs 1e3 and are likely formed through trampling of a stable surface. B) DRS-08-10b, PPL. The microgranular surfaces are often
associated with mm or smaller nodules of secondary minerals, such as gypsum or, as seen here, phosphates (p). Sand-sized grains of quartz (q).

3448

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Fig. 14. Schematic proﬁle of the Main Sector at DRS showing the typical microfacies associations for each LU and the diachronic variation in these associations. LU 1 has a higher
proportion of geogenic components (sand-sized grains of quartz) than other LUs, but exhibits human inputs and modiﬁcations, particularly in the form of trampled surfaces. LU 2
exhibits a higher proportion of combustion-derived components, both within the matrix and also in the form of combustion features. The trampled surfaces found in LU 1 are also
found in LU 2. The hearths in LU 2 were not cleaned out after use, but abandoned, and the ashy tops are often cemented. The presence of combusted material within the trampled
deposits shows that there were once more hearths present at DRS than visible today. LU 3 contains relatively less charcoal than LU 2, but exhibits trampled surfaces as in LUs 1 and
2. Rounded fragments of charcoal within these MF units suggest that the occupants were burning hearths, but they may have been centered in a speciﬁc location of the site, outside
of the current area of excavation. LU 4 is composed of palimpsests of different MF units that were formed through hearth burning and maintenance (rake out and dumping of ashes),
bedding construction and burning, and trampling. Overall, LU 4 suggests a phase of occupation that was more intense than previous occupations, and that placed a greater emphasis
on site maintenance practices and the structuring of domestic space.

The presence of well-preserved combustion features surrounded by a matrix of reworked combusted material raises the
question of why certain hearths were preserved when others were
destroyed by trampling. A similar issue was raised for the
numerous combustion features at Kebara, where many of them are
well preserved and not modiﬁed by trampling (Meignen et al.,
2007). Many of the preserved combustion features in LU 2 exhibit
cemented surfaces, which would have made them more resistant to
physical reworking. Some of the cemented hearths were partially
reworked by trampling, as exhibited by erosional surfaces on the
cemented ashes and the incorporation of burnt bone fragments
with sparry coatings in the trampled MF units. There are several
hypotheses that we can imagine that would explain the selective

cementation of certain hearths. For instance, the cemented hearths
may represent surfaces that were exposed on the surface during
short occupational hiatuses, allowing enough time for the ashes to
recrystallize. Similarly, the hearths may have become cemented
during periods of the year when moisture in the form of fog or dew
was more frequent. Another possibility is that hearths that were
constructed nearer to the entrance of the shelter were exposed to
more moisture, leading to cementation, whereas hearths toward
the back of the shelter were less frequently exposed to moisture. All
of these hypotheses, particularly those invoking spatial variation in
cementation, require further excavation and sampling to test.
The secondary mineral assemblages are variable throughout LU
2. In the combustion features, calcareous ashes are relatively well

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

preserved, although partially recrystallized. Gypsum nodules are
often found in the ashy MF units. Bone within the combustion
features is also relatively well-preserved. Within the trampled
deposits, calcite appears to have been partially or completely dissolved. Gypsum nodules are common in the combustion features as
well, but other minerals, such as secondary phosphates (including
possible montgomeryite) and nitrates are more common. The
bones also appear partially dissolved and recrystallized in some of
the trampled deposits. In proﬁle, the variation in diagenesis appears diachronic; however, as pointed out by Goldberg et al. (2009),
the vertical variation in stacked anthropogenic MF units can also
reﬂect horizontal variation in the distribution of these MF units. In
LU 2 at DRS, the variation in secondary mineral assemblages is
likely the result of horizontal variation in the concentration of
calcite. Combustion features and other calcareous ashy deposits
acted as chemical buffers, keeping the pH relatively high (fresh
wood ashes can have pH values around 13) and preventing the
recrystallization and dissolution of bone and the formation of
secondary phosphate minerals that form at low pH (e.g. Crandallite). In these ashy deposits, the calcite can appear partially
recrystallized, or locally dissolved. The only obvious secondary
mineral formation in the ashy deposits is gypsum, which likely
formed from the interaction between ash-derived carbonates and
guano (Shahack-Gross et al., 2004). Outside of the combustion
features, in the trampled deposits, ash was present, but mixed with
other components. Once dispersed within the trampled deposits,
the calcite was more easily dissolved, thereby reducing the pH of
the sediments and allowing for the recrystallization of the bones
(Berna et al., 2004).
A good example that illustrates the formation processes of LU 2
is sample DRS-08-09 from the early HP (Fig. 9). Here, we observe a
trampled deposit with a coarse, underlying MF unit of MF type 1
and a mm-thick MF unit of MF type 3 (microgranular) on top. This
microfacies association represents a trampled surface that was
exposed for some period of time, as demonstrated by the presence
of mm-sized gypsum nodules at the top of the MF unit. Resting
directly on this surface is a hearth, which has a clear, charcoal base
and ash top. The ashes here are partially dissolved at the base and
recrystallized at the top, suggesting that they were exposed to
surface processes for a relatively short period of time. Directly
resting on this hearth is another hearth with a charcoal-rich base
and ashy top. The ashes in this hearth are also partially dissolved at
the base and recrystallized at the top. Larger gypsum nodules (up to
1 cm in diameter) are present at the top of this hearth, again suggesting that it was exposed for some period of time. The hearth in
turn is overlain by several trampled MF units exhibiting microgranular structures.
The sequence in sample DRS-08-09 is informative about the
human activities at the site, and about the spatial relationship
among different MF types in LU2. Within the entire LU, we see an
increase in combustion related activities relative to LU1. Hearths
were constructed on stable surfaces that had previously been
trampled and exposed, as evidenced by the presence of microgranular cappings and concentrations of diagenetic minerals within
the uppermost mm of the trampled deposits. The hearths were not
managed (i.e., cleaned out) but rather, were abandoned after use.
When burning localities were reused, as seen in sample DRS-08-09,
the previous hearth had already been abandoned for some time, as
evidenced by the formation of an alteration crust on the surface of
the ashes. Generally, however, the positioning of the hearths appears to have been spatially variable during the formation of LU 2.
As discussed above, the trampled MF type represents areas of human activity outside the area of the hearths (cf. Hayonim Cave e
Goldberg and Bar-Yosef, 1998). The repeated formation of stable,
altered surfaces, and the lack of evidence for intensive site

3449

maintenance during LU 2 suggests that visits to the site were
relatively brief yet repetitive.
4.2.3. LU 3
The contact between LU 2 and LU 3 is sharp, but resembles the
numerous contacts found between individual MF units within LUs
1 and 2, suggesting that the change in sediment type does not
represent a signiﬁcant temporal break in the sequence. In the ﬁeld,
LU 3 appears very distinct from the over- and under-lying deposits.
It lacks any clear combustion features, appears generally homogenous, and contains relatively higher amounts of diagenetic minerals. Upon closer inspection in the ﬁeld and under the microscope,
we see that LU 3 is not a massive deposit but rather is composed of
numerous individual MF units, including MF types 1 and 3. These
MF units contain a markedly higher proportion of humiﬁed material relative to charcoal and other combustion-derived residues.
One possible explanation for the less abundant combustionderived residues is that LU 3 represents a decrease in occupational intensity of the site. However, we do not observe a corresponding drop in artifact density within LU3; rather, we see an
increase in the artifact density within SU Jeff (Porraz et al., 2013). In
addition, the presence of numerous trampled surfaces within LU 3
suggests that humans were repeatedly using the shelter during the
formation of this LU. Another hypothesis is that LU 3 represents a
shift in the spatial arrangement of activities within the site. If
hearth burning and other combustion activities were conducted
elsewhere, speciﬁcally outside of the current area of excavation, we
would expect to see a relative decrease in combustion features and
combustion-derived materials within the sampled sequence. If this
is the case, it would represent a distinct break in the organization of
space within the site. During the formation of LU 2, the location of
hearth activity appears variable across all areas of the site. During
the formation of LU3, on the other hand, hearth burning and related
activities may have been repeatedly centered within a certain
location of the shelter. This hypothesis, however, remains untested
with the current, available exposures at the site.
4.2.4. LU 4
This LU marks a dramatic change within the sequence at DRS,
not only in terms of the frequency of combustion features and
combustion-derived components, but also in the MF types present.
Therefore, we interpret LU 4 as not just a shift in the location of
hearth-centered activities, but rather a change in the types of activities carried out at the site.
The contact between LU 4 and LU 3 is sharp and similar to
other contacts between individual MF units throughout the DRS
sequence. Thus, there is no micromorphological evidence for a
signiﬁcant hiatus in sedimentation. Some combustion features are
similar to those present in LU 2. These lenticular hearths are
comprised of charcoal-rich bases and ashy tops. However, the
majority of the combustion features in LU4 are not lenticular, but
are rather laterally extensive deposits of ash and charcoal. In thin
section, many of these features appear to be ash-dumpsdfeatures
that result from a type of activity that is not evidenced in the
underlying LUs. The dark-colored deposits within LU 4 are charcoal rich in thin section, and when not associated with a hearth
base (MF type 4) are usually categorized as MF type 1c (trampled).
The trampled deposits within LU4 contain signiﬁcantly more
abundant charcoal compared to other deposits in the DRS
sequence and also do not exhibit the microgranular MF type that
is so common in LUs 1e3. In addition to ash dumps, another
microfacies association found for the ﬁrst time in LU4 is burnt
bedding (MF types 6 and 7). Although only one occurrence of this
microfacies association was identiﬁed in thin section, thin, laterally continuous laminations visible in the ﬁeld within LU 4 at DRS

3450

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

resemble similar laminations that were interpreted as bedding at
Sibudu (Wadley et al., 2011). This observation implies that burnt
bedding is more abundant at DRS than might be suggested by the
present samples.
Superﬁcially, LU 4 at DRS resembles stacked combustion feature
deposits from other Middle Paleolithic and MSA sites. However, our
high-resolution analyses reveal that LU 4 at DRS is most similar to
deposits such as the post-HP layers at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009;
Wadley et al., 2011) and Layer 8 at Pech de l’Azé IV, France (Dibble
et al., 2009), and is not consistent in composition with the stacked
hearths of Kebara (Meignen et al., 2007) or Hayonim caves, Israel
(Goldberg and Bar-Yosef, 1998). LU 4 at DRS represents a complex
palimpsest of multiple occupations in which different, spatiallydeﬁned activities occurred, leaving behind distinct, individual MF
units. As occupation followed occupation, the different microfacies
were superposed, creating the stacked, “layer-cake”-like deposit we
see today. The range of MF types present within LU 4 at DRS suggests that the humans responsible for the accumulation of these
deposits were living within the shelters very differently from the
previous occupants. The previous occupants lived atop, and
extensively trampled, exposed dirt surfaces. In contrast, the LU 4
occupants constructed surface preparations in the form of organic
bedding. Once this bedding had served its purpose, it was lit on ﬁre.
This behavior is a form of site maintenance activity (Goldberg et al.,
2009; Wadley et al., 2011). Other maintenance behaviors, such as
hearth rake-out and cleaning, are evidenced by ash dumps, which
are numerous within LU 4. These features are important for understanding the duration of site occupation, because cleaning of a
hearth implies its repeated use. This behavior is not evidenced in
the hearths found in LU 2, which appear to have been abandoned
after use. When burning localities were reused within LU 2, it was
only after the existing hearth, presumably from a previous occupation of the site, had been abandoned for some time. In general,
the deposits of LU 4 are not just the result of an increase in occupational intensity, but they also record a change in the types and
arrangement of domestic activities occurring at the site. As in the
post-HP layers at Sibudu (Goldberg et al., 2009) and in the Upper
Paleolithic layers at Hohle Fels (Miller, 2010), the uppermost lithostratigraphic unit at DRS records a marked increase in sitemaintenance activities.
4.3. Diagenesis at DRS
Post-depositional chemical diagenesis at DRS appears complex,
and we currently have only a partial picture of all relevant diagenetic processes acting at the site. The main diagenetic minerals
identiﬁed include gypsum, nitrates (both potassium and sodium),
and phosphates. The gypsum likely has several, non-mutually
exclusive, origins, including guano (Shahack-Gross et al., 2004),
ashes (Schiegl and Conard, 2006), and marine aerosols. The location
of gypsum along the walls of the shelter where birds roost, supports
the guano hypothesis. However, it is not clear if guano explains the
occurrence of all forms of gypsum at DRS, particularly within the
sediments. Gypsum is commonly, but not exclusively, associated
with ashy MF units, suggesting that the Caþ2 ions in the gypsum
may be derived from the alteration of calcareous ashes.
Many of the calcareous ashes at DRS are well preserved, but
show localized effects of decalciﬁcation and recrystallization.
Although phosphates, likely derived from guano (Hutchinson,
1950) and other biological sources, are present, phosphatization
of ashes does not seem to have been a major diagenetic process at
DRS. The altered ashes do not ﬂuorescence, as one would expect if
they were phosphatized. Rather, the altered ashes appear isotropic
in XPL, suggesting the ash remains are composed mostly of amorphous silica (Schiegl et al., 1996).

Nitrates are also relatively common at DRS and likely have a
biogenic origin (Sandler et al., 1988). A study of salt encrustations
on South African rock shelters with active rock hyrax populations
identiﬁed nitrates, gypsum, and phosphates, along with rarer salts,
including syngenite (K2Ca(SO4)2$H2O) and polyhalite (K2Ca2Mg(SO4)4$2H2O) (Prinsloo, 2007). Rock hyrax urine, therefore, may
provide a source of potassium for the formation of niter at the site.
The occurrence of a thick niter crust on the surface of the site and
along the surface of a large boulder within the excavation units of
K5/6 and L5/6 likely formed as a result of capillary action (Weiner,
2010) as nitrate-rich water was drawn to the surface of the site and
the boulder. The formation of these crusts is unusual at DRS, where
most diagenesis appears to have taken place syndepositionally. The
niter crusts at DRS likely formed relatively late: some time after the
deposition and surﬁcial erosion of LU 4, between the MSA and LSA
occupations.
Although we have only a preliminary understanding of the
diagenetic processes acting at DRS, the presence of phosphate
minerals, gypsum, and most importantly, nitrates suggests that the
sediment moisture regime was arid throughout the deposition of
the sequence. It is this aridity which accounts for the excellent
preservation of organic materials at the site. Most of the diagenesis
at DRS appears to have occurred at or very near the surface of the
individual MF units. In any case, there is little to no evidence for
large volumes of water moving throughout the sequence. Rather,
the concentration and clear association of diagenetic minerals near
paleosurfaces within the sequence suggest that the main source of
moisture for the diagenetic reactions was likely dew or fog. The
intensity of diagenesis generally appears to decrease from the
bottom to the top of the sequence. This trend is likely a result of the
higher concentration of calcareous ashes within LU 4, which would
have acted as a chemical buffer.
5. Conclusions
The sequence at DRS formed through a complex interaction of
depositional and post-depositional geogenic, biogenic and
anthropogenic processes. Our micromorphological analyses
demonstrate that humans contributed signiﬁcantly to the formation of the site. Behaviors such as the burning and maintenance of
hearths, and the construction and burning of bedding contributed
to primary sedimentation. The modiﬁcation of surfaces through
trampling contributed to secondary mechanical breakdown and
redistribution of materials within the site. Furthermore, our study
provides information and context for the evaluation of the technological and cultural sequence at the site.
5.1. Archaeosequence
The evidence for the early appearance of HP technology at DRS
do not rest solely on radiometric ages (Tribolo et al., 2009, 2013),
but also on stratigraphic arguments (Porraz et al., 2013). Some elements of HP technology appear below the “Classic HP” (Porraz
et al., 2013), and Early HP technology co-occurs with bifacial
technology across six SUs. Our micromorphological observations
and site formation model do not support the hypothesis that bioturbation or other post-depositional vertical disturbances are
responsible for the early appearance of HP technologies or cooccurrence of different technological elements. Our analyses
reveal that the entire DRS sequence is composed of numerous, individual depositional events and well-preserved paleosurfaces. The
only post-depositional mixing process that is evidenced in thin
section is trampling, which resulted in the mixing of materials over
horizontal areas, but only impacted the upper mm of exposed
surfaces. Had other types of mixing processes occurred, speciﬁcally

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

those that could have moved large artifacts over many cms of
vertical distance, the individual MF units that we observe would
not be preserved.
We also do not observe any major depositional or occupational
hiatuses within the sequence e except for the boundary between
the MSA and LSA e a hiatus in occupation observed both stratigraphically and in the radiometric dating sequences (Jacobs et al.,
2008; Tribolo et al., 2009, 2013). The DRS sequence is therefore
different from southern African MSA sites, such as Sibudu (Wadley
and Jacobs, 2006), that contain evidence for repeated hiatuses in
sedimentation. Although the numerous paleosurfaces at DRS do
represent discontinuities, they are most likely not laterally extensive or long lived. Anthropogenic deposition at DRS was generally
constant, but occurred in spatially discrete areas during different
occupations, so that some surfaces of the shelter experienced
limited or no deposition while others experienced deposition in the
form of hearth burning or other human activities. The sum of these
processes produced a more-or-less continuous stratigraphic
sequence.
5.2. Shifting modes of occupation
One of the most striking visual aspects of the DRS sequence is
the variation in types of deposits, which we used to deﬁne four
distinct LUs. Our micromorphological analysis shows that the
variation in sediments at the site is largely the result of diachronic
changes in types of human activities conducted at DRS. During the
deposition of LUs 1e3, corresponding to pre-SB, SB, Early HP, MSAJack and Intermediate HP (type Jeff), hearths were abandoned after
use, and apparently not maintained (e.g., no rake-out). The surfaces
of the occupations were not prepared, and show extensive evidence
for trampling. In LU 4, which corresponds with the Intermediate HP
(type Fiona), Late HP, and the post-HP, we see a dramatic change in
the types of activities conducted at the site. Although some hearths
are clearly preserved, many were cleaned out, and maintained for
possible reuse. The occupants also began to construct ﬂoor preparations, in the form of bedding. Once this bedding had served its
purpose, it was lit on ﬁre, likely as part of site maintenance activities (Goldberg et al., 2009; Wadley et al., 2011). In general, the
diachronic change in the types of anthropogenic deposits at DRS
suggests a shift in the mode of occupation at the site, with the inhabitants placing a greater investment in the structuring and
maintenance of their domestic space.
In sum, micromorphological and FTIR analyses at DRS not only
provide a context in which to interpret other classes of data, but
also provide information on human behaviors that are invisible to
other types of archaeological analysis. Future geoarchaeological
work at the site will focus on understanding the diagenetic pathways and processes that have chemically altered the archaeological
record. As excavations continue, we will also expand the spatial
coverage of sampling in order to test our hypotheses on shifting
modes and centers of occupation. The results and formation model
presented here, however, clearly demonstrate that by applying a
microcontextual (Goldberg and Berna, 2010) approach to the geoarchaeological record, we can investigate deposits as artifacts in
their own right.
Acknowledgments
The Diepkloof excavation has been funded by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MAE, sous-direction de l’Archéologie), the
Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur region, the Aquitaine region, the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS) and has
beneﬁted from additional ﬁnancial support from the Paleontological Scientiﬁc Trust (PAST) and the National Research Foundation

3451

(NRF) of South Africa. Christopher Miller’s position is funded by the
Carl-Zeiss-Stiftung. We would like to thank Susan Mentzer, Andrew
Kandel and the anonymous reviewers for providing helpful comments to earlier versions of this manuscript.
References
Angelucci, D.E., 2010. The recognition and description of knapped lithic artifacts in
thin section. Geoarchaeology 25, 220e232.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2008. Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and associated
hominin behavior. Israel Journal of Earth Sciences 56, 107e121.
Berna, F., Matthews, A., Weiner, S., 2004. Solubilities of bone mineral from
archaeological sites: the recrystallization window. Journal of Archaeological
Science 31, 867e882.
Cabanes, D., Mallol, C., Expósito, I., Baena, J., 2010. Phytolith evidence for hearths
and beds in the Late Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu Cave (Cantabria,
Spain). Journal of Archaeological Science 37, 2947e2957.
Canti, M.G., Linford, N., 2000. The effects of ﬁre on archaeological soils and sediments: temperature and colour relationships. In: Proceedings-prehistoric Society, vol. 66. The Prehistoric Society, pp. 385e396.
Canti, M.G., 2003. Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant
ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena 54, 339e361.
, C.Cartwright, 2013. Identifying the woody resources of Diepkloof Rock Shelter
(South Africa) using scanning electron microscopy of the MSA wood charcoal
assemblages. Journal of Archaeological Science 40, 3463e3474.
Courty, M.-A., 2001. Microfacies analysis assisting archaeological stratigraphy. In:
Goldberg, P., Holliday, V.T., Ferring, C.R. (Eds.), Earth Sciences and Archaeology.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York.
Courty, M.-A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R., 1989. Soils and Micromorphology in
Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Dayet, L., Texier, P.-J., Daniel, F., Porraz, G., 2013. Ochre resources from the Middle
Stone Age sequence of Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa.
Journal of Archaeological Science 40, 3492e3505.
Dibble, H.L., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.P., Mentzer, S., Niven, L., Richter, D.,
Sandgathe, D., Théry-Parisot, I., Turq, A., 2009. A Preliminary Report on Pech de
l’Azé IV, Layer 8 (Middle Paleolithic, France). Paleoanthropology 2009, 182e219.
Flügel, E., 2004. Microfacies of Carbonate Rocks: Analysis, Interpretation and
Application. Springer, Berlin.
Gé, T., Courty, M.-A., Matthews, W., Wattez, J., 1993. Sedimentary formation processes of occupation surfaces. In: Goldberg, P., Nash, D.T., Petraglia, M.D. (Eds.),
Formation Processes in Archaeological Context. Prehistory Press, Madison (WI),
pp. 149e163.
Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1998. Site formation processes in Kebara and Hayonim
Caves and their signiﬁcance in Levantine prehistoric caves. In: Akazawa, T.,
Aoki, K., Bar-Yosef, O. (Eds.), Neandertals and Modern Humans in Western Asia.
Plenum, New York, pp. 107e123.
Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Micromorphology and context. Quaternary International 214, 56e62.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N., 2009. Bedding,
hearths, and site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu Cave,
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 1,
95e122.
Horwitz, L.K., Goldberg, P., 1989. A study of Pleistocene and Holocene hyaena
coprolites. Journal of Archaeological Science 16, 71e94.
Hutchinson, G.E., 1950. The Biogeochemistry of Vertebrate Excretion. Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History 96, 1e554.
Jacobs, Z., Roberts, R.G., Galbraith, R.F., Deacon, H.J., Grün, R., Mackay, A., Mitchell, P.,
Vogelsang, R., Wadley, L., 2008. Ages for the Middle Stone Age of Southern
Africa: implications for human behavior and dispersal. Science 322, 733e735.
Karkanas, P., Pavlopoulos, K., Kouli, K., Ntinou, M., Tsrtsidou, G., Facorellis, Y.,
Tsourou, T., 2011. Paleoenvironments and site formation processes at the
Neolithic lakeside settlement of Dispilio, Kastoria, Northern Greece. Geoarchaeology: an International Journal 26, 83e117.
Lenoble, A., 2003. Le rôle du ruissellement dans la formation des sites préhistoriques: approche expérimentale. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Bordeaux I.
Lenoble, A., Martineau, M., 2003. Apport du pénétromètre à la connaissance d’un
site préhistorique: le cas de l’abri de Diepkloof, Province du Cap, Afrique du Sud.
Revue d’Archeometrie 27, 27e36.
Mallol, C., Hernández, C.M., Cabanes, D., Sistiaga, A., Machado, J., Rodríguez, Á.,
Pérez, L., Galván, B., 2012. The Black Layer of Middle Paleolithic combustion
structures. Interpretation and archaeostratigraphic implications. Journal of
Archaeological Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.09.017.
Meignen, L., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2007. The Hearths at Kebara Cave and their
role in site formation processes. In: Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L. (Eds.), Kebara Cave
Mt. Carmel, Israel. The Middle and Upper Paleolithic Archaeology, Part I.
Peadbody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, pp. 91e122.
Mentzer, Susan M., 2012. Microarchaeological approaches to the identiﬁcation and
interpretation of combustion features in prehistoric archaeological sites. Journal
of Archaeological Method and Theory, 1e53.
Miller, C.E., 2010. Formation Processes, Paleoenvironments, and Settlement Dynamics at the Paleolithic Cave Sites of Hohle Fels and Geißenklösterle: a

3452

C.E. Miller et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 3432e3452

Geoarchaeological and Micromorphological Perspective. Unpublished Doctoral
dissertation, University of Tübingen.
Miller, C.E., 2011. Deposits as artifacts. TÜVA Mitteilung 12, 91e107.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N.J., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2009. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
modiﬁed combustion features. P@lethnologie 2009, 25e37.
Miller, C.E., Sievers, C., 2012. An experimental micromorphological investigation of
bedding construction in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu, South Africa. Journal of
Archaeological Science 39, 3039e3051.
Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.-Ph., Poggenpoel, C., Porraz, G., Texier, P.-J., 2013. Introduction to the project and excavation of Diepkloof Rock Shelter (Western Cape,
South Africa): a view on the Middle Stone Age. Journal of Archaeological Science
40, 3369e3375.
Porraz, G., Texier, P-J., Archer, W., Piboule, M., Rigaud, J.-P., Tribolo, C., 2013. Technological successions in the Middle Stone Age sequence of Diepkloof Rock
Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 40,
3376e3400.
Prinsloo, L.C., 2007. Rock hyraces: a cause of San rock art deterioration? Journal of
Raman Spectroscopy 38, 496e503.
Rentzel, P., Narten, G., 2000. Zur Entstehung von Gehniveaus in sandig-lehmigen
Ablagerungen: Experimente und archäologische Befunde. Jahresbericht der
Archäologischen Bodenforschung des Kantons Basel-Stadt, 1999, 107e127.
Sandler, A., Goldberg, P., Gilbert, D., 1988. Nahal Heimar Cave: Geological Observations on the Sediments. In: Atiqot, vol. 18. Israel Department of Antiquities.
pp. 64e67.
Schiegl, S., Conard, N., 2006. The Middle Stone Age sediments at Sibudu: results
from FTIR spectroscopy and microscopic analyses. Southern African Humanities
18, 149e172.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in Hayonim and
Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations,
and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 23,
763e781.
Schiegl, S., Lev-Yadun, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Goresy, A.E., Weiner, S., 1994. Siliceous aggregates from prehistoric wood ash: a major component of sediments in Kebara
and Hayonim caves (Israel) Israel. Journal of Earth Sciences 43, 267e278.
Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., 2012. Stable carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions
of wood ash: an experimental study with archaeological implications. Journal of
Archaeological Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.06.036.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Weiner, S., 2004. Bat guano and preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites. Journal of Archaeological Science
31, 1259e1272.

Sievers, C., Muasya, A.M., 2011. Identiﬁcation of the sedge Cladium mariscus subsp.
Jamaicense and its possible use in the Middle Stone Age at Sibudu, KwaZuluNatal. Southern African Humanities 23, 77e86.
Singer, R., Wymer, J.J., 1982. The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South
Africa. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Steele, T., Klein, R.G., 2013. The Middle and Later Stone Age Faunal remains from
Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological
Science 40, 3453e3462.
Stoops, G., 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith Thin
Sections. Soil Science Society of America, Madison, WI.
Texier, P.-J., Porraz, G., Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.-P., Poggenpoel, C., Tribolo, C., 2013.
The context, form and signiﬁcance of the MSA engraved ostrich eggshell
collection from Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa. Journal of
Archaeological Science 40, 3412e3431.
Tribolo, C., Mercier, N., Valladas, H., Joron, J.L., Guibert, P., Lefrais, Y., Selo, M.,
Texier, P.-J., Rigaud, J.-P., Porraz, G., Poggenpoel, C., Parkington, J., Texier, J.-P.,
Lenoble, A., 2009. Thermoluminescence dating of a StillbayeHowiesons Poort
sequence at Diepkloof Rock Shelter (Western Cape, South Africa). Journal of
Archaeological Science 36, 730e739.
Tribolo, C., Mercier, N., Douville, E., Joron, J.-L., Reyss, J.-L., Rufer, D., Cantin, N.,
Lefrais, Y., Miller, C.E., Parkington, J., Porraz, G., Rigaud, J.-P., Texier, P.-J., 2013.
OSL and TL dating of the Middle Stone Age sequence of Diepkloof Rock Shelter
(Western Cape, South Africa): a clariﬁcation. Journal of Archaeological Science
40, 3401e3411.
Villagran, X.S., Balbo, A.L., Madella, M., Villa, A., Estevez, J., 2011. Stratigraphic and
spatial variability in shell middens: microfacies identiﬁcation at the ethnohistoric site Tunel VII (Tierra del Fuego, Argentina). Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 3, 357e378.
Wadley, L., Jacobs, Z., 2006. Sibudu Cave: background to the excavations, stratigraphy and dating. Southern African Humanities 18, 1e26.
Wadley, L., Sievers, C., Bamford, M., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., Miller, C., 2011. Middle
Stone Age bedding construction and settlement patterns at Sibudu, South Africa. Science 334, 1388e1391.
Weiner, S., 2010. Microarchaeology, Beyond the Visible Archaeological Record.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2002. Three-dimensional distribution of
minerals in the sediments of Hayonim Cave, Israel: diagenetic processes and
archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 1289e1308.
Weiner, S., Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1995. Mineral assemblages in
Kebara and Hayonim Caves, Israel: excavation strategies, bone preservation, and
wood ash remains Israel. Journal of Chemistry 35, 143e154.

