Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Initial micromorphological results from Liang Bua, Flores (Indonesia):
Site formation processes and hominin activities at the type locality of
Homo ﬂoresiensis
Mike W. Morley a, *, Paul Goldberg a, b, Thomas Sutikna a, c, Matthew W. Tocheri d, e,
Linda C. Prinsloo a, Jatmiko c, a, E. Wahyu Saptomo c, a, Sri Wasisto c, Richard G. Roberts a
a

Centre for Archaeological Science, School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
€ologie, Eberhard-Karls-Universita
€t Tübingen, Rümelinstrasse 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
Institut für Naturwissenschaftliche Archa
Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional, Jakarta 12510, Indonesia
d
Department of Anthropology, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON P7B 5E1, Canada
e
Human Origins Program, Department of Anthropology, National Museum of National History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC 20013, USA
b
c

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 20 March 2016
Received in revised form
31 May 2016
Accepted 8 June 2016
Available online 29 June 2016

Liang Bua, a karstic cave located on the island of Flores in eastern Indonesia, is best known for yielding
the holotype of the diminutive hominin Homo ﬂoresiensis from Late Pleistocene sediments. Modern
human remains have also been recovered from the Holocene deposits, and abundant archaeological and
faunal remains occur throughout the sequence. The cave, the catchment in which it is located and the
gross aggradational phases of the sediment sequence have all been subject to a great deal of scientiﬁc
scrutiny since the discovery of the holotype of H. ﬂoresiensis in 2003. A recent program of geoarchaeological research has extended analyses of the site’s deposits to the microstratigraphic (micromorphological) level. The stratigraphic sequence in the cave is well deﬁned but complex, comprising
interstratiﬁed sediments of diverse lithologies and polygenetic origins, including volcanic tephras, ﬁnegrained colluvium, coarse autogenic limestone gravels, speleothems and anthropogenic sediments, such
as combustion features. The sedimentological and chemical heterogeneity suggest that processes of site
formation and diagenesis varied markedly through time, both laterally and vertically. We present initial
results from samples collected in 2014 from an excavation area near the rear of the cave, which yielded
radiocarbon ages from charcoal that ﬁll an important temporal gap in the chrono-stratigraphic sequence
of previously excavated areas of the site. The results indicate marked changes in site environment and
hominin activity during the Late Pleistocene, relating primarily to the degree to which the cave was
connected to the hydrogeological system and to the varying intensities of use of the cave by hominins.
Importantly, we identify anthropogenic signs of ﬁre-use at the site between 41 and 24 thousand years
ago, most likely related to the presence of modern humans.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Liang Bua
Homo ﬂoresiensis
Modern human
Late Pleistocene
Micromorphology
Geoarchaeology
Fire-use

1. Introduction
Flores is a tectonically active, oceanic island situated in the
central sector of the Indonesian Archipelago and forms part of the
Banda Volcanic Arc (Westaway et al., 2009a,b) (Fig. 1a). Liang Bua is
a large karstic cave situated in the central western part of the island
(Fig. 1b,c) and formed in the base of the northern slopes of a low
mountain of Miocene limestone (Fig. 2a,b). It probably developed
originally as a sub-surface dissolution chamber, or doline, which

* Corresponding author.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.06.004
0305-4403/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

subsequently collapsed and was exposed sub-aerially as the adjacent riverdthe Wae Racangdcut laterally and vertically into its
ﬂoodplain (Westaway et al., 2009a). The 2001e2004 excavations at
Liang Bua recovered the remains of a previously unknown hominin
species, Homo ﬂoresiensis, and this discovery has raised many
interesting questions about the evolutionary history of this enigmatic species and past patterns of hominin dispersals and interactions between Africa and Island Southeast Asia (Brown et al.,
2004; Morwood et al., 2004, 2005; Dennell and Petraglia, 2012;
Boivin et al., 2013; Cooper and Stringer, 2013; Bellwood, 2014;
Dennell et al., 2014; Groucutt et al., 2015; Reyes-Centeno et al.,

126

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Fig. 1. (a,b) Location of Liang Bua on the island of Flores in Island Southeast Asia; (c) plan of the site with the area of focus for the present study denoted by the red rectangle, and
the location of the stratigraphic column on the western proﬁle (Fig. 4) indicated by the red arrow (modiﬁed from Sutikna et al., 2016). (For interpretation of the references to colour
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

2015; Sutikna et al., 2016; Wurster and Bird, 2016).
Ongoing excavations at Liang Bua are revealing a deep and
spatially complex series of interstratiﬁed clastic sediments and
chemical precipitates (Fig. 2cee), the deposition of which most
likely correlates with marked changes in depositional environment
at the site over the last two hundred millennia (Westaway et al.,
2009b; Sutikna et al., 2016). A robust understanding of the formation, preservation and degradation of the site is essential to
draw meaningful inferences about the rich assemblages of stone
artefacts and hominin and other faunal remains recovered from the
deposits. This need has become even more apparent following the
recently revised interpretation of the stratigraphy and chronology
of the Liang Bua deposits and the H. ﬂoresiensis remains found
within them (Sutikna et al., 2016). This new evidence suggests that
all skeletal remains of H. ﬂoresiensis and artefacts attributed to this
species are between about 100e60 and 190e50 thousand years
(ka) old, respectively (Sutikna et al., 2016), and do not extend until
~17 or 13e11 thousand calibrated radiocarbon (14C) years before
present (ka cal. BP) as suggested previously (Morwood et al., 2004,
2005, 2009; Roberts et al., 2009).
Deposits dated to between ~46 and 20 ka cal. BP are conspicuously missing from the main areas excavated previously and this
hiatus in the stratigraphic record covers a crucial time period of
potential hominin prehistory on Flores (Sutikna et al., 2016) (Fig. 3).
Currently, the earliest evidence for modern humans on Flores
comes from the Holocene sequence at Liang Bua and suggests a

relatively continuous presence at the site after ~11 ka cal. BP
(Morwood et al., 2004, 2005, 2009; Moore et al., 2009). In contrast,
archaeological evidence suggests modern humans were on Timor
by ~42 ka cal. BP (O’Connor et al., 2011; O’Connor, 2007, 2015) and
had reached Australia by ~50 ka ago (Roberts et al., 1990, 1994;
Turney et al., 2001; Bowler et al., 2003; Allen and O’Connell,
2014; Clarkson et al., 2015; Hiscock, 2015; O’Connell and Allen,
2015). The discovery and documentation of ~46e20 ka deposits
at Liang Bua or elsewhere on Flores would potentially provide
critical details for addressing questions regarding potentially latesurviving populations of H. ﬂoresiensis and/or an earlier presence
of modern humans on the island.
In 2011, an area of 1 m by 2 m (Sector XXIV) was excavated in the
middle rear of the cave (Figs. 1c and 2c). The primary goal of this
excavation was to document the possible southernmost extent of
tephra T3 (~50e47 ka), one of eight tephras (T1eT8) identiﬁed in
the stratigraphic sequence at Liang Bua (Sutikna et al., 2016). T3 is a
key stratigraphic layer that overlies all known H. ﬂoresiensis remains. In 2014, a charcoal sample from 152 cm depth (below the
present surface of the cave ﬂoor) in Sector XXIV returned an unexpectedly early age of 34.5e33.9 ka cal. BP (95% conﬁdence interval). This result was 15 millennia older than any of the 14C ages
obtained previously from Liang Bua (Roberts et al., 2009) and raised
the possibility that much of the unexplored rear of the cave could
preserve deposits within the 46e20 ka cal. BP interval, thus
providing a more complete picture of site formation and hominin

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

127

Fig. 2. (A) Geomorphological context of Liang Bua (blue arrow), situated at the base of a low hill, and (B) view of the interior of the cave taken from near the rear wall; (C) view from
the central rear of the cave looking northeast, showing Sector XXIV (the focus of this study) in the foreground and indicated in green; in the background are excavated sectors near
the eastern wall (see Fig. 1c); (D) lower part of sequence exposed in west proﬁle of Sector XXIV, with combustion feature (red arrow, Unit 5), iron-stained layer with ﬂowstones
(upper black arrow, Unit 4), ﬂowstone separating Units 2 and 3 (lower black arrow), and truncation horizon at Unit 1e2 interface shown by dashed line, scale is 10 cm (yellow bar in
bottom right corner); (E) upper ﬂowstone separating Units 8 and 9 with manganese oxide horizon beneath, scale in bottom right corner is 10 cm). Photographs in (A) and (B) by
Djuna Ivereigh (IndonesiaWild.com). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

activities over the last ~190 ka. Thus, a 1 m by 2 m area (Sector
XXVII) immediately adjacent to the north wall of Sector XXIV was
excavated (Fig. 1c) in 2014 and additional charcoal samples were
obtained for radiocarbon dating.
In an earlier geomorphological study of Liang Bua, Westaway
et al. (2009a, b) divided the cave into a rear and front chamber,
with coarse conglomeritic and ﬁne colluvial sediments deposited at
the rear, and a deep, well-stratiﬁed sequence at the front. They
reconstructed diachronic changes in depositional environments by
employing broad-scale sedimentological and geomorphological
observations from several exposures across the site, using luminescence, electron-spin resonance, uranium-series and 14C chronologies (Roberts et al., 2009). They identiﬁed a number of
processes driving sediment accumulation and degradation,
including ﬂuvial (riverine sediments), colluvial (slopewash),
chemical precipitation (ﬂowstone formation), volcanic (aeolian
tephra) and post-depositional processes (subsidence and slumping). However, they did not attempt to reconstruct in ﬁne detail the
depositional and post-depositional environments at the site.
To develop high-resolution models of depositional and postdepositional change at Liang Bua, a program of multi-scalar geoarchaeological research was initiated in 2014, focussing initially on
Sector XXIV because of its potential to provide new information
regarding the history of the site during this previously undocumented period. We targeted the western wall of this sector to
improve our understanding of the formation and preservation of

sediments located in the rear of the cave, and their association with
those recorded at the southern edge of the front chamber. The
wider goals of this geoarchaeological research are to analyse the
site and stratigraphy at varying scales, from the macro to the micro,
using a suite of ﬁeld and analytical techniques, including landscape
geomorphological survey, sedimentology, micromorphology, and
vibrational spectroscopy (i.e., Fourier-transform infrared [FTIR] and
Raman spectroscopy). Here we report initial results from the microscale component of the study. Our speciﬁc aims were to investigate
and clarify the environmental conditions during deposition of each
lithological layer, identify the diagenetic processes that have
occurred (e.g., any modiﬁcation of the sediments or the material
contained within them) and to explore possible signals of hominin
behaviour preserved within the deposits potentially spanning the
chronological gap from ~46 to 20 ka ago. Together, these data
provide critical and much needed context for interpreting the
environmental history of the site and its rich archaeological and
palaeontological record.
2. Methods
Backﬁll was removed from the previously excavated 1 m by 2 m
portion of Sector XXIV. Detailed macro- and micro-stratigraphic
descriptions of the ~4 m depth of deposits exposed along the
western wall of the Sector were undertaken in the ﬁeld, and ten
lithological units were identiﬁed (referred to here as Units 1e10).

128

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Fig. 4. Stratigraphy of western proﬁle of Sector XXIV. Units (encircled numbers),
micromorphological samples (rectangles), calibrated radiocarbon ages (in ka cal. BP,
black numerals) and previously reported U-series ages (in ka, blue numerals;
Westaway et al., 2007a; Sutikna et al., 2016) are indicated. (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)

Fig. 3. Stratigraphic schemes compiled from multiple exposures of the sequence
across Liang Bua (at left, modiﬁed from Sutikna et al., 2016) and of Sector XXIV (at
right), the focus of this study. The thicknesses of the sediment columns are only
approximate and are not to scale, representing roughly 15 m and 4 m of vertical
sequence, respectively. This disparity in thicknesses is related to the relatively shallow
depth of deposits at the rear of the cave. Cross-correlation between the sequences is
possible using a ﬂowstone and tephra T3, with possible correlation between lower
ﬂowstones indicated. The 46e20 ka gap in the sequence reported by Sutikna et al.
(2016) is mostly ﬁlled by the new sequence dated in the rear of the cave. The new
14
C ages (in ka cal. BP) are shown in red; ages in blue are from Sutikna et al. (2016). (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

Six samples for micromorphological analysis (MM4eMM9) were
collected to characterise the major stratigraphic units and

microfacies (Fig. 4, Tables 1 and 2); samples MM1eMM3 were
collected from Sector XII to target speciﬁc tephra layers that do not
occur in Sector XXIV and were not included in this study.
Micromorphology samples were collected as oriented blocks
using plaster bandages to retain their integrity. Once extracted,
these samples were shipped to the University of Wollongong
(Geoarchaeology Laboratory in the Centre for Archaeological Science), where they were partially unwrapped and oven-dried at
40  C for ﬁve days or until dry. Each block was impregnated with
crystic resin (Dalchem) diluted with styrene at a ratio of 9:4 and
catalysed with methyl ethyl ketone peroxide (MEKP) to yield
12.5 ml per litre of resin/styrene mixture. After curing for seven
days, the samples were returned overnight to the drying oven at
50  C. They were then trimmed with a circular saw ﬁtted with a
diamond encrusted masonry saw blade into 50 mm by 75 mm
‘wafers’ that were sent to Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA,
USA) for manufacture of the ﬁnal thin sections.
Thin sections were observed with stereo and petrographic microscopes at magniﬁcations ranging from 8 to 200 under planepolarised light (PPL) and cross-polarised light (XPL). In addition,
thin sections were scanned on a ﬂatbed scanner at 2400 dpi, both in
reﬂection mode and without the ﬂatbed cover (Goldberg and

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

129

Table 1
Summary characteristics of the lithological units under examination for this study, using ﬁeld-data collected in 2014 and 2015. The ages are based on the new radiocarbon
chronology presented in this study (see Table 3), except: (*) U-Th ages measured previously on calcite ﬂowstones (Westaway et al., 2007a; Sutikna et al., 2016); (1) broad age
ranges estimated by the dating of associated units in this study and Sutikna et al. (2016).
Unit Description (sedimentology)/Nature of interface with underlying unit
no.

Field interpretation

10

Recent to sub-recent cave ﬂoor sedimentation e multiple Possible
origins including colluvial, aeolian and bedrock attrition
Neolithic
hearth?
e
Possibly wetter conditions, causing post-depositional
alteration of underlying ﬂowstone
Fine-grained colluviation in humid conditions
e
Humid conditions, laminar sheetﬂow.
Post-depositional diagenetic transformation of carbonate
ﬂowstone
Occasional
Coarse, autogenic limestone gravel originating from the
combustion
physical breakdown of the walls and roof. Presence of
water attested by carbonateebonded sediments? Generally bi-products
dry?
Abundant evidence of reworked combustion bi-products, Frequent
but without intact combustion features. Layers of indurated combustion
sediment within this unit suggest periods of standing water bi-products
within otherwise dry period
Reworking of eroded parent bedrock by colluviation and Combustion
bi-products
spalling of material from walls and roof. Sporadic use of
cave by hominins
Combustion
Coarse autogenic material originating from the physical
breakdown of the parent limestone intermixed with coarse feature, hearth
colluvium. Shift to drier conditions?
Anthropogenic burning activity

9

e

8

7

6

5

4

3

e
2

1

Firm to compact, silts and silty clays. Homogeneous with very weak
bedding. Becomes looser towards the modern ground surface. Organic
rich
Clay silt with frequent sand-sized inclusions of calcium carbonate and
occasional ﬁne sand
Flowstone
Laminar calcite speleothem overlying manganese-stained and cemented
sediment
Variably compact sands with frequent poorly-sorted limestone gravels. A
thick (~5 cm) bed of carbonate-cemented sediment is present within this
unit. Occasional charcoal fragments and ﬂecks recorded in the lower
region
Partially indurated sand with occasional to moderate frequencies of
limestone gravel. Distinct lenses and beds of ash and ﬁne charcoal
interspersed in the matrix

Archaeomaterial

Moderately compact silts with frequent small limestone gravel and
calcareous granular inclusions. Very occasional anthropogenic inputs,
including ﬁne charcoal ﬂecks and fragments
Loose, limestone gravel in a sandy matrix, ﬁning upwards to medium to
small gravels in clay silt matrix. Occasional charcoal fragments and/or
ﬁnely divided charcoal powder interspersed within the sediment matrix.
Localised lenticular burnt feature present in upper part of this unit
containing abundant ash and charcoal
Flowstone and iron pan
Surface stabilisation, humid, wetting-drying? Iron-panning e
Thin upper and lower ﬂowstones (~1e2 cm), seal a compact Fe-stained
sediment
e
Firm and homogeneous, clay-rich silts with very occasional ﬁne gravel Re-activation of colluvial sedimentation
inclusions. This unit has afﬁnities with Unit 2, but with a higher clay
content. The distal end of tephra T3 is present within this unit where it
banks up against and pinches out on the angled lower surface
Flowstone
Surface stabilisation, laminar sheetﬂow
e
Firm, weakly stratiﬁed and sub-horizontally bedded, clay silts with sandsized and ﬁne gravel inclusions. Blocky structure. Pale and calcareous
towards upper contact. Fine white laminae of calcium carbonate increase
in uppermost 0.10 m directly beneath ﬂowstone
Firm to compact, horizontally bedded, ﬁne to medium, interbedded
sands, silts and clay. Layers exhibit various bedform morphologies
including ripples with clay drapes and iron-stained foresets

Thin
Age
section
e

e

e

e

MM4

e

MM4

25.0
e24.4

MM5

31.1
e34.5

MM6

33.3

MM6

38.3
e40.9

e

46.6*

MM7

~50
e471

e

49.9*

Colluvial sediments accumulating on angled slope of cave e
ﬂoor topography. Calcareous laminae may foreshadow
formation of overlying ﬂowstone?

MM8
MM9

~190
e501

Fluvial, in-channel, channel-marginal and slackwater
sediments

MM9

~190
e501

Aldeias, in press); the latter produces an image similar to dark ﬁeld
illumination and highlights highly reﬂective areas, such as those
rich in carbonate and iron. Thin section terminology follows that of
Stoops (2003).
A total of nine charcoal samples from Sector XXIV and the
immediately adjacent Sector XXVII were sent to DirectAMS (Seattle,
WA, USA) for 14C dating, where they were pretreated using acidebaseeacid procedures (Table 3). The 14C content was then
measured using accelerator mass spectrometry and the conventional 14C ages were converted to calendar-year age ranges at the
68% and 95% conﬁdence intervals using the SHCal13 southern
hemisphere calibration data set (Hogg et al., 2013) and CALIB 7.1
(Stuiver et al., 2016; http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/).
FTIR spectra were recorded in the mid-infrared region
(600e4000 cm 1) using a Lumos infrared microscope from Bruker.
The spectra were measured directly on the thin sections MM4B and
MM6B. All spectra were recorded in absorbance mode using an
attenuated total reﬂectance (ATR) objective ﬁtted with a germanium ATR crystal. The spectral resolution was 4 cm 1 and 64 individual scans were combined to obtain each spectrum. In cases
where the FTIR spectrum of the resin also appeared in the spectra, a
spectrum recorded on a piece of the same resin was subtracted
using the interactive subtraction option in the OPUS software from
Bruker.

e

A WITec 3000 Alpha spectrometer was used to obtain the
Raman spectra. A 532 nm solid state laser (WITec Focus Innovation)
was used as the excitation source and a long distance 50 Zeiss
objective focussed the laser on the samples, resulting in a spot size
of ~2 mm2. The number of acquisitions and acquisition time
depended on the crystallinity of the material, but typically 10 acquisitions, each of 6 s duration, were made at a spectral resolution
of 2 cm 1.
3. Radiocarbon dating
The 14C dating results for the charcoal samples from Sectors
XXIV and XXVII are shown in Table 3 and Fig. 4. The 95% conﬁdence
interval age range of the studied sequence is between ~41.5 and
24.4 ka cal. BP, conﬁrming that this rear area of the cave preserves
deposits that are missing only a few metres further to the north in
all previously excavated areas of the cave. One of the nine samples
(D-AMS-007553) returned a stratigraphically inconsistent age
(26.9e26.1 ka cal. BP at the 95% conﬁdence interval) for Unit 5.
Given the relatively large interstitial void spaces between gravel
clasts in this layer, it is possible that this anomalously young age
(relative to two other ages from Unit 5 that accord with the ages
from Units 6e8) relates to charcoal that has inﬁltrated from higher
up in the sequence.

130

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Table 2
Summary micromorphological characteristics of the units as observed in the thin sections, including interpreted process and inferred depositional environment.
Thin
section

Unit no.

Micromorphological characteristics

Process

Depositional environment

MM4A

9

Colluviation (wet)

Sub-recent (mid to late Holocene) colluvial accretion of
sediments across cave ﬂoor environment

MM4B

9
8

Very loose and porous structure, with abundant clay
aggregates, frequently slaked. Common clay coatings on
mineral grains and within void spaces. Heavily bioturbated.
Frequent vughs and channel voids
Same as MM4A
Severely phosphatised mineral layer overlying manganesestained sediments, most likely due to the presence of
phosphate above the ﬂowstone (subsequently eroded).
Authigenic phosphates present below, and local
decalciﬁcation immediately below modiﬁed ﬂowstone.
Secondary carbonate precipitation observed in void spaces
and in lower portion of thin section
Loosely-packed and porous silty sand with frequent coarse
angular limestone and speleothem fragments. Poorly
sorted, with localised patches of ﬁner-grained clays and
silts. Intensive bioturbation, with silt coatings common. Fine
charcoal dispersed throughout matrix in low to medium
quantities. Clay aggregates often mechanically fractured
Same as MM5A, but with localised Fe-staining and higher
concentration of ﬁne charcoal fragments and ﬂecks
Loosely- to moderately-packed silts and sands with coarse,
angular limestone fragments. Localised patches of ﬁnergrained clays and silts towards upper portion. Infrequent
charcoal ﬂecks and fragments. Vughs occasionally contain
re-precipitated calcium carbonate. Occasional Fe-staining of
silt coatings
In general, the sediments have close afﬁnities with Unit 6 in
MM6A. The exception is a micro-stratiﬁed combustion
feature with very high occurrences of charcoal and ash (the
latter being partly dissolved and re-crystallised). High
frequencies of thermally-modiﬁed (cracked and baked) clay
aggregates, with basal rubiﬁed zone. Sediments below
feature are highly calcareous, with ﬁner-grained sediments
above
Same as Unit 6 in MM6B, but highly calcareous and lower
concentrations of ﬁnes

Colluviation (dry)
Mineral
precipitation
Diagenesis (guano
deposition?)

Humid environment with persistent ingress of groundwater
resulting in carbonate ﬂowstone production. Subsequent
dissolution and phosphatisation of ﬂowstone, and localised
decalciﬁcation of underlying calcareous sediments by acidloaded percolating water

Roof spall
Colluviation (dry)

Coarse sediments accumulated due to physical attrition of
the walls and roof of the cave, with some minor input of
colluvium (cracked clay clasts). High porosity with
relatively large interstitial void spaces. Generally dry
environment with sporadic groundwater throughput

MM5A

7

MM5B

7

MM6A

6

MM6B

6

5

MM7

3

MM8

2 (upper)

MM9

2 (lower)

1e2
transition
1

Fine silts and clays, including clay aggregates and ﬁne clay
matrix. Coarse components dominated by rounded clay
aggregates and low frequencies of poorly sorted mineral
grains (primarily quartz). Occasional small vughs and
channel voids. Bioturbation evident above ash, and thin lens
of secondarily deposited ash intermixed with silts and clays.
Volcanic ash is very ﬁnely laminated with ﬁning-up
sequence and occasional vesicular pumice grains. Planar
void present immediately beneath thin volcanic ash, where
it is also locally decalciﬁed
Very similar to Unit 3 but with a higher porosity. Vughs and
planar voids, occasionally coated with silt. Larger clay and
silt rip-up clasts in upper half. In upper third very ﬁnely
laminated calcium carbonate and occasional thicker bands
of calcite with plant cellular structure

Very similar to Unit 7, with evidence of sporadic water
Roof spall
Colluviation (dry) throughput evidenced by the increase in ﬁne silts and clays
Hominin use of ﬁre Combustion feature is in-situ ﬁreplace related to hominin
activity in this rear area of the site

Roof spall
Colluviation (dry)
Colluviation
Volcanism

Colluviation
Mineral
precipitation

Calcareous silt and clay with small quantities of ﬁne sand Colluviation
(poorly sorted). Abundant clay clasts generally intact.
Highly calcareous in localised areas. Becomes increasingly
Fe-stained away from contact with Unit 1

Erosion
Fluvial
Interbedded calcite sands, silts and clays. Localised Fesedimentation
staining occurring within b-fabric of clays and silts, and
inﬁlling void spaces. Deformation features at upper contact
and occasional small burrows with silt coatings

Coarse autogenic sediments derived from the walls and roof
of the cave with minor addition of colluvium under dry
conditions
Colluviation under slopewash and gravitational conditions
Deposition of windborne volcanic ash (tephra), banked up
against angled surface. Possible thermal reaction with
underlying sediment and shrinkage of ﬁnes
Air-borne volcanic ash deposition (Tephra T3). Acid
environment, promotion of mineral dissolution
Sheetwash/slopewash sedimentation. Localised diagenesis
due to acid dissolution of mobile minerals (calcite)

Continuing water ingress to site and slopewash colluviation
of ﬁnes under wet conditions, with small-scale erosion of
clays from surface and rear of cave. Increasingly persistent
surface ﬂow causing calcite precipitation at and below the
surface, decreasing porosity. Stability of cave ﬂoor causes
reduction of colluvial input. Biologically-mediated incipient
ﬂowstone formation
Newly formed, steep-angled relief initiates slopewash
sedimentation. Active erosion and re-mobilisation of
sediments downslope from rear of site, coincident with
activation of hydrological system connected by ﬁssures in
bedrock. Calcite present as ﬁne, reworked limestone/calcite
grains
River migration away from cave, lowered base level
River inundation of cave system. Variable energy ﬂuvial
sedimentation, including deposition of calcareous channel
sand, and ﬁne-grained slackwater deposits.

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

4. Macro-stratigraphy and micromorphology
4.1. Thin section MM9 (Units 1 and 2; Figs. 4 and 5)
Units 1 and 2 occur stratigraphically below tephra T3 and the
ﬂowstone that underlies it (Fig. 4). Although the ages of these two
units at this exact location are yet to be determined, they are
interpreted here to be between ~190 and 50 ka, based on their
stratigraphic relationships with the rear conglomerate wall and T3,
respectively (Sutikna et al., 2016). Three distinct lithological facies
are apparent in thin section MM9, with the two lowermost corresponding to Unit 1 and the upper correlating with Unit 2 (Fig. 5a).
The upper part of Unit 1 exhibits an erosional contact that dips
towards the mouth of the cave at an angle of ~45e55 . The basal
sediments of Unit 1 comprise horizontally-bedded sediments of
calcareous, iron-stained sand, grading upwards into laminated ﬁne
sands and silts (Fig. 5b,c), the latter exhibiting deformation structures at the upper interface (e.g., shear and contortions). The sediments from Unit 2 that rest unconformably on Unit 1 consist of
rounded clay aggregates derived from sediments similar to those
just beneath the contact, and are cemented by micrite and in some
cases by sparite.
4.2. Thin section MM8 (Unit 2; Figs. 4 and 6)
This sample was taken from the upper part of Unit 2, directly
beneath a laterally extensive ﬂowstone (~2e4 cm thick) (Figs. 4 and
6a). The sediments consist of poorly sorted, sand-sized clay aggregates in a clayey, calcitic matrix. In addition, occasional fragments and ﬂecks of charcoal, fragments of ﬂowstone and bone, and
highly weathered rip-up clasts of silt and clay are present in the
matrix. In the upper part of the thin section, layers of ﬁnely laminated calcite occur within the matrix (Fig. 6d,e), becoming
increasingly well-developed towards the top, immediately below
the base of the ﬂowstone. The increase in these calcite laminae,
which exhibit an organic cell structure (Fig. 6d), parallels an increase in carbonate cementation.
4.3. Thin section MM7 (Unit 3; Figs. 4 and 7)
Thin section MM7 (Unit 3; Fig. 7a) is separated from Unit 2 by
the ﬂowstone referred to above. Unit 3 bears afﬁnities to Unit 2,
being clay-rich, densely packed, and poorly sorted (Fig. 7b,c). A
discrete volcanic tephra with vesicular pyroclasts, which pinches
out to the south towards the rear of the cave, represents the
southernmost extent of T3 (~50e47 ka) at Liang Bua. A large planar
void separates the tephra from the underlying decalciﬁed sediment
(Fig. 7a), which exhibits weakly developed ﬁssures aligned
perpendicular to the tephra. Internally, the tephra exhibits a uniform ﬁning-up texture (Fig. 7c,d). Above the primary tephra band
there is evidence for secondary tephra deposition in the form of a
thin laminated band, possibly relating to the reworking of the
primary tephra by sheetwash. Such laminations are absent in the
primary tephra band, precluding deposition by water of this volcanic ash. In the uppermost 1e2 cm of MM7 (Fig. 7a), the sediments
become looser and more porous, with local occurrences of grain
aggregates (~3 mm in diameter).
4.4. Thin sections MM6A and MM6B (Units 5 and 6; Figs. 4 and 8).
Units 5 and 6 are between ~41.5 and 32.8 ka cal. BP in age, based
on the dated charcoal samples from these units (Table 3). Sample
MM6 includes sediments that indicate a major shift in depositional
environment. Two thin sections were made from this sample, with
MM6A (Fig. 8a,b) and MM6B (Fig. 8f) corresponding to the upper

131

half (Unit 6) and lower half (Units 5 and 6) of the sample,
respectively.
In the ﬁeld, Unit 5 heralds a marked increase in coarse limestone
gravel that continues up to and includes Unit 8 (Fig. 4), allied with a
highly calcareous matrix. At the top of Unit 5 is a lenticular combustion feature that measures ~0.4 m across (Fig. 2d), as observed
in proﬁle (Figs. 3 and 7a,b). This feature has a distinct internal
structure, comprising three micro-horizons, which are from bottom
to top (Fig. 8a):
1. Reddened substrate formed in a ﬁne-grained, calcareous sand
and silt, with inclusions of bright red, heat-cracked clay
aggregates;
2. Dark, organic-rich layer containing charcoal, ash aggregates,
some burnt bone and ﬁne sand-sized aggregates of red and
organic-rich clay; and
3. Upper calcareous layer of mostly intact micritic ashes (Fig. 8c,d);
in some areas the calcite has been dissolved and reprecipitated
as micrite cement.
Raman and FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. 8e) reveal clay and calcite are
present throughout thin section MM6B, with the exception of the
calcareous ash layer, where FTIR spectra of calcite and calcite mixed
with phosphate were recorded. The position of the strongest band
in the calcite spectra varied between 1410 and 1390 cm 1, possibly
due to the varying amount of phosphate present in the structure,
thereby illustrating the heterogeneous process of diagenesis
(Fig. 8gei). The pigment colouring the clay yellow was identiﬁed as
goethite, FeO(OH), which was oxidised to hematite (Fe2O3) when
baked by the ﬁre.
Unit 6 occurs in the upper part of thin section MM6B and
throughout thin section MM6A (Fig. 4). Its composition is very
similar to Unit 5, but with an increase in void space (Fig. 8f). The key
characteristics of Unit 6 are high frequencies of coarse autogenic
material comprising speleothem fragments and limestone spalls
(500 mme10 mm in maximum dimension; Fig. 8f) originating from
the cave walls and roof. We observe a signiﬁcant decrease in ﬁnes
(clays and ﬁne silts) and a marked increase in anthropogenic and
biogenic components (e.g., charcoal, bone, owl pellet; Fig. 8c). Most
of these inclusions are fractured and broken; for example, no intact
features can be seen at the top of thin section MM6A.
4.5. Thin sections MM5A and MM5B (Unit 7; Figs. 4 and 9).
Unit 7 is ~34.5e31.1 ka cal. BP in age, based on the dated charcoal samples (Table 3). The coarse components of this lithological
facies are similar to those in the underlying Unit 6, containing
frequent, large and angular autogenic limestone and speleothem
fragments, as well as mechanically fractured clay intraclasts/fragments (Fig. 9aec). Fine charcoal fragments and ash are also scattered throughout the matrix (Fig. 9d,e). Two thin sections were
made from sample MM5, the upper half of Unit 7 represented by
MM5A (Fig. 9a) and the lower half by MM5B (not shown).
The upper part of sample MM5 is noteworthy for its granular
porosity and abundance of loosely aggregated, angular clay clasts
(Fig. 9a). The matrix in the lower part of MM5A is calcareous,
consisting of calcite-cemented, sand-sized limestone particles and
micritic ash (Fig. 9d,e). By contrast, the upper part of MM5A contains only isolated patches of micritic groundmass, which appear to
be partially dissolved. Similarly, we noted the presence of etched
limestone with increased porosity, and dissolved ash and decalciﬁed bone fragments. These features show two cycles of diagenesis: an initial phase represented by calcite cementation of the
ashes and limestone sand, followed by a phase of patchy calcite
dissolution. Furthermore, these observations suggest that

132

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Table 3
New 14C ages for charcoal from Sectors XXIV and XXVII.
Sample code

D-AMS-007550
D-AMS-005947
D-AMS-007546
D-AMS-007547
D-AMS-007549
D-AMS-007555
D-AMS-007551
D-AMS-007552
D-AMS-007553
a
b

Sector/Depth (cm)/Unit

XXIV/143/7
XXIV/152/7
XXIV/153/7
XXIV/154/7
XXIV/201/6
XXVII/137/8
XXVII/237/5
XXVII/239/5
XXVII/250/5

Methodsa

ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS
ABA/AMS

d13C (‰)

26.3
28.1
28.0
23.7
33.2
22.1
21.7
27.1
20.4

14

C (yr BP)

27,954
30,168
27,466
27,587
29,074
20,516
36,323
33,817
22,288

±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±

125
158
120
107
153
58
259
173
94

Age
Median calibrated

Calibrated range (ka cal. BP)

yr cal. BP

68% CIb

95% CIb

31,605
34,161
31,263
31,328
33,258
24,616
40,930
38,284
26,463

31.75e31.42
34.32e33.98
31.36e31.16
31.43e31.27
33.49e33.04
24.77e24.45
41.25e40.64
38.54e38.07
26.61e26.28

32.03e31.29
34.52e33.85
31.46e31.07
31.53e31.13
33.66e32.82
24.95e24.36
41.48e40.31
38.70e37.67
26.85e26.14

ABA, acid-base-acid pretreatment; AMS, accelerator mass spectrometry measurement technique.
CI, conﬁdence intervals.

decalciﬁcation probably took place from the top down, which is
consistent with phosphatisation of the overlying deposit (thin
section MM4B, described below). Some of the calcite within the
matrix is derived from loose, unbedded aggregates of ash, which
point to reworking of former combustion features. Bioturbation
increases in the upper part of MM5A (Fig. 9a), as does porosity, and
is speciﬁcally exempliﬁed by a large elliptical void (~35 mm across)
in the middle of sample MM5A; the void is partially inﬁlled with silt
and clay containing inclusions of limestone and clay clasts.

4.6. Thin sections MM4A and MM4B (Units 8 and 9; Fig. 4 and 10).
Unit 8 is dated to 25.0e24.4 ka cal. BP, based on a single dated
charcoal sample (D-AMS-007555 in Table 3). Two thin sections
were made from sample MM4, which spans Units 8 (MM4B;
Fig. 10a,b) and 9 (MM4A; not shown). These reveal a distinct change
in depositional environment, with a switch to wetter environmental conditions indicated by repeated calcite precipitation and
dissolution cycles (Fig. 10aed). Thin section MM4B captures the
transition from lithological Units 8 to 9, while MM4A corresponds
exclusively to Unit 9. In general, these sediments are richer in clay
than those in Unit 7, and the overall aggregate size is much smaller
than in the underlying units. The clay is identiﬁed as kaolinite by
the typical OH stretching vibrations at 3696 and 3620 cm 1 in the
FTIR spectrum (Fig. 10e). Capping Unit 8, observed in thin section
MM4B, is a laterally continuous, ~20 mm-thick ﬂowstone. This
ﬂowstone has been diagenetically altered by phosphatisation
throughout, along with the precipitation of Mn oxides below the
top of the crust (Fig. 10a,b,f,g). This Mn oxide is identiﬁed as MnO2,
with a broad Raman band at 580 cm 1 (Fig. 10e). Manganese oxides
are sensitive to laser power; although this was kept quite low,
MnO2 was oxidised to Mn3O4 (655 cm 1) by laser heating
(Buciuman et al., 1998). A representative FTIR spectrum of the
phosphate crust shows that the most intense peak, attributed to the
asymmetric stretch vibration (n3) of the phosphate group, appears
at 1024 cm 1. This is a 17 cm 1 wavenumber shift from 1041 cm 1
reported for dahlite, which is the main component of similar crusts
found in prehistoric caves such as Kebara and Hayonim (Weiner
et al., 2002). The shift to lower wavenumbers also occurs in some
Raman spectra, where the position of the symmetric stretch vibration (n1) of the phosphate group has shifted from ~962 cm 1 for
dahlite to ~950 cm 1 attributed to amorphous calcium phosphate
(Sauer et al., 1994). A possible explanation is that the humid tropical
environment of Liang Bua inhibits crystallisation, but further work
is necessary to verify this interpretation.
Directly overlying this weathered speleothem, with a sharp
bounding interface, is a layer of ﬁnely aggregated angular clay

fragments. This uppermost part of the proﬁle contains very loose
and porous sediments, as well as reworked aggregates that have
very different compositions.
5. Discussion
5.1. Depositional and diagenetic environments inferred from the
micromorphology
The results of the micromorphological analyses allow for a
reﬁned reconstruction of the depositional and diagenetic history of
Liang Bua between ~190 and 20 ka ago (Fig. 11).
5.1.1. Unit 1, thin section MM9: ﬂuvial sedimentation and incision
(~190e120 ka)
Exposed at the base of the stratigraphic column, we record
cross-bedded ﬂuvial sands (Unit 1; corresponds with Unit 2 of
Westaway et al., 2009b) that are consistent with deposition in a
ﬂuvial, channel-marginal environment, probably sometime between ~190 and 120 ka ago when the Wae Racang still ﬂowed
within the cave (Roberts et al., 2009; Sutikna et al., 2016). Variations in ﬂow velocity associated with this channel-marginal interaction deposited interstratiﬁed beds of iron-stained, channel sands
(small bars, medium-energy environment) and ripple bedforms on
which clay and silt drapes were deposited in a very low-energy
environment (Fig. 5a). As the river migrated away from the site,
downcutting into its ﬂoodplain, the upper part of this alluvium was
truncated, creating a steep-angled surface susceptible to smallscale slumping, and on to which successive sediments were
deposited (Fig. 2d).
5.1.2. Unit 2, thin sections MM9 and MM8: colluviation and
ﬂowstone formation (~190e120 to 50 ka)
Following the retreat of the river from the cave, slopewash
colluviation was initiated under humid conditions. The water that
mobilised these sediments entered the cave via ﬁssures at the rear,
consistent with previous observations (Westaway et al., 2009b).
This accords with our observations of downslope movement of
poorly sorted sediments containing high frequencies of rounded
clay and silt aggregates, including reworked material scoured from
Unit 1 beneath. The high frequency of void spaces and the overall
porous character of these sediments suggest intensive bioturbation
(probably by burrowing insects) in the damp environment at the
rear of the cave. As only a small amount of charcoal is present and it
has been reworked, we cannot ascertain whether it has a natural or
anthropogenic origin.
A gradual switch in the hydrology of the cave is marked by the

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

133

Fig. 5. Thin section MM9 from Units 1 and 2. (a) Macroscan (dark ﬁeld view) showing the sharp erosional contact (arrows) between Units 1 and 2. Unit 1, below the contact,
comprises horizontally-bedded calcareous sands overlain by orange silts and clays. Unit 2 is looser and more calcareous, being secondarily cemented. Rectangle refers to enlarged
view in (b) and (c); (b) interbedded silt and clay with localised iron staining and mottling. The vertical crack microstructure is due to the clayey nature of the sediment and relates to
post-excavation drying and shrinking. Some bioturbation is evident by the mm-sized circular void at centre-left ﬁlled with loose material (PPL); (c) lowermost zone showing
calcareous sand that is locally cemented by sparry calcite (XPL). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)

Fig. 6. Thin section MM8 from Unit 2. (a) Macroscan (dark ﬁeld) shows calcitic laminae representing incipient ﬂowstone formation. The brown, rounded clay aggregates are similar
in composition to the bedded silts and clays in Unit 1 (b) lower region of thin section shows clay-rich aggregates (with quartz and limestone sand inclusions) that have been
compressed and plastically deformed (XPL); (c) same as (b), in PPL; (d) ﬂowstone showing ﬁnely laminated structure with biological crusts, again indicating ﬂowstone formation
partly driven by algae and/or moss growth, as can be seen at the rear of the cave today. (e) detailed view of ﬂowstone at base exhibiting a laminar cellular structure suggesting
biologically-mediated calcite precipitation. Rounded clay grain in upper right has a similar composition as clays in Unit 1 (PPL).

increasingly frequent calcitic micro-laminae recorded in the sediment directly beneath the well-developed ﬂowstone that immediately overlies Unit 2. These calcitic micro-laminae features show
signs of biological structures, suggesting they were probably
formed partly through the presence of algae and/or mosses. Hydrologically, these incipient ﬂowstones record the early stages of

persistent ingress of CaCO3-charged spring ﬂow, precipitating
calcite into the upper surface of the ﬁne-grained sediment and/or
within patches of vegetation growing at the rear of the cave. This
reorganisation of the cave hydrology may reﬂect changes in the
monsoonal cycle and concomitant ﬂuctuations in precipitation
(Westaway et al., 2007b, 2009a).

134

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Fig. 7. Thin section MM7 from Unit 3. (a) Macroscan with distal end of tephra T3 evident. Sediments in the upper 1e2 cm are heavily bioturbated; (b) matrix in upper region of thin
section showing limestone clast at right (itself containing volcanic grains) and dense, partially aggregated clay-rich matrix with inclusions of volcanic grains (PPL); (c) clay-rich
matrix with heterogeneous array of coarser components reminiscent of a colluvial diamict (PPL); (d,e) detail of tephra showing clear ﬁning-up sequence (XPL and PPL).

5.1.3. Unit 3, thin section MM7: colluviation and volcanic activity
(~50e47 ka)
Above the ﬂowstone that caps Unit 2, we detect a return to
colluvial sedimentation. Poorly sorted sediments again indicate
downslope colluviation of both ﬁne clays (travelling partially in
suspension) and coarser clay aggregates, which have been
reworked from older deposits further to the rear of the cave, many
of which are in the process of disaggregating (slaking). The aggregates are more densely packed in the lower half of the thin section
than in the upper half, above a layer of volcanic ash, which is the
distal expression of tephra T3. This tephra is thickest (~75 cm) from
the cave centre to the eastern wall, where it ﬁlls a basin-like
depression in the relict cave ﬂoor topography (Sutikna et al., 2016).
In Sector XXIV, the main (macroscopic) tephra band (~5 mm in
thickness) is clean and homogeneous, and displays a linear ﬁningup composition indicating burial in primary position (see, for
example, Morley and Woodward, 2011). This observation is supported by a series of planar voids parallel and perpendicular to the
base of the tephra, consistent with thermal shrinking of the semisaturated clays beneath. A series of impure tephra laminations
are recognised in the sediment matrix immediately above the
primary fallout, indicative of remobilisation of tephra sourced from
elsewhere in the cave or from outside via inﬁltration.
5.1.4. Units 5e8, thin sections MM6, MM5 and MM4: switch to
drier conditions, hominin ﬁre-use (~41e24 ka)
We observe macro- and micro-stratigraphic features in Units
5e8 that include in situ combustion features and reworked combustion bi-products. This evidence clearly indicates controlled use
of ﬁre by hominins between ~41 and 24 ka cal. BP. An intact combustion feature interstratiﬁed between Units 5 and 6 presents a
very well-deﬁned suite of features characteristic of an in situ ﬁreplace. In Unit 7, we identify disassembled combustion bi-products
concentrated in discrete bands and lenses, interspersed within
the sediment matrix. These are indicative of the reworking of
combustion material, either by anthropogenic ‘housekeeping’
practices (e.g., Goldberg et al., 2009; Miller et al., 2009) or by
colluviation.
This ﬁre use by hominins at the site took place against a backdrop of generally drier conditions occurring from midway through
Marine Isotope Stage 3 to a time broadly equating to the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM) (Clark et al., 2009). Sediments with a calcareous

and calcite-cemented matrix, and a general reduction in ﬁne clays
and silts, support decreased sheetwash and a reduction, or cessation, of water ingress to Sector XXIV. Furthermore, there is evidence
for increased physical and mechanical attrition of the cave walls
and roof, with high frequencies of coarse, autogenic limestone
spalls and speleothem fragments that commonly exhibit an angular
morphology. Aggregated clay grainsdintroduced into the sediment
matrix by weathering and dry colluviationdare commonly mechanically fractured, in contrast to the clay aggregates undergoing
slaking in Units 2 and 3. Lastly, we note enhanced physical
weathering of inclusions, which is suggestive of sub-aerial weathering in a dry substrate without trampling.
5.1.5. Units 8 and 9, thin section MM4: return to humid conditions,
accelerated dissolution processes (~24 ka to present)
A ﬂowstone that formed directly on top of Unit 8 marks a return
to more humid conditions at the site, with the initiation of laminar
sheetﬂow from the rear of the cave. The laterally extensive ﬂowstone covers an area of at least 8 m2 where observed in Sectors
XXIV and XXVII. It appears intact at the macroscopic scale, but
micromorphological analysis shows severe diagenesis of this speleothem, with calcite replacement by phosphate throughout.
Phosphatisation of this ﬂowstone is also associated with precipitation of manganese oxide directly beneath. These phosphate
crusts (Fig. 9c,d) are similar to those found in prehistoric caves
elsewhere, such as Kebara and Hayonim (Weiner et al., 1995),
where their formation has been tied to the presence of bat guano
(Karkanas et al., 2002; Karkanas and Goldberg, 2010). Furthermore,
it is likely that percolating water associated with this diagenesis is
responsible for the decalciﬁcation of Unit 7 seen in sample MM5.
This water may have formed a perched water-table or occluded
layer that was previously responsible for cementation of part of
Unit 8, as seen at the base of thin section MM4B.
Colluvial slopewash (Unit 9; also Unit 10 that was not sampled
for this study) signiﬁes a strengthening of humid conditions, with
an increase in clay and clay intra-clasts. Many of the grain aggregates are angular in shape and appear to have a variety of compositions, characteristic of reworking of weathered material that
had accumulated in the ﬁssures and across the rear of the cave
during the preceding dry period; these deposits would have been
mobilised when reconnected with the karst hydrogeological system. It is clear from the sedimentary record and the slope of the

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

135

Fig. 8. Thin sections MM6B and MM6A from Units 5 and 6. (a) Macroscan of MM6B. The vertical tripartite structure of the combustion feature is shown, with basal reddened
substrate (1), dark organic-rich layer (2), and an upper calcareous ash layer (3), indicating that this feature is intact and in primary position; (b) note the bright calcareous area in the
lower part of the dark ﬁeld scan, associated with calcareous environment adjacent to ﬂowstone; (c) remains of rodent bones held within a disintegrating raptor pellet (PPL); (d)
bedded ashes in the upper part of the combustion feature (PPL); (e) Raman (left) and FTIR spectra recorded from a selected area of MM6Bdsee box in (a)dshowing the distribution
of calcite and calcite-phosphate mixtures, as well as the iron oxides colouring the clay yellow (goethite) and red (hematite); (f) dark ﬁeld macroscan of MM6A showing heterogeneous nature of the deposit, including angular clasts of limestone and speleothem (roof fall), some of which show localised laminated calcareous coatings (arrows). Also note the
contrast between these sediments and the ﬁne-grained colluvium from the base of the sequence, where coarse autogenic material is a major component of the inclusions; (g)
isotropic, phosphatised area in the centre (XPL); (h) detail of laminated calcite coating on speleothem fragment. This stalactitic tufa formed on the limestone before it was detached
from the ceiling (XPL); (i) lower left-hand quadrant of MM6A. Note the partially decalciﬁed nature of the matrix in the lower right-hand side of the photomicrograph. Mineral grain
is hornblende (PPL). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

bounding surfaces that ﬂuctuations in water ingress through ﬁssures in the bedrock at the rear of the cave were instrumental in
changes in the depositional environment at Liang Bua.

5.2. Key processes and other factors governing sediment deposition
and diagenesis at Liang Bua
The results of this study reﬁne our understanding of the

processes, mechanisms and other factors inﬂuencing sediment
deposition and diagenesis at Liang Bua, building on those identiﬁed
previously (Westaway et al., 2009b). We discuss each of these, in
turn, below.

5.2.1. Colluviation
This is the dominant mode of sedimentation observed in the
rear of Liang Bua. As originally recognised by Westaway et al.

136

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Fig. 9. Thin section of MM5A from Unit 7. (a) Dark ﬁeld macroscan showing predominantly angular aggregate grains of orange clay, some of which are fractured, reworked from the
back of the cave by water ingress occurring during a generally drier period. The elliptical void in the centre is lined with poorly sorted silt and clay that also contains sand-sized
aggregates of clay. Note the presence of black ﬂecks of charcoal scattered throughout the slide, indicative of anthropogenic inputs. Arrow points to a localised concentration of
calcareous ash, shown in detail in (bee); (b,c) rounded clay grain at right exhibits a desiccation crack ﬁlled with secondary calcite that is coeval with that in the matrix. Note the
partially decalciﬁed domain at left that is isotropic in (c) (XPL). These images demonstrate that the sediments were deposited, cemented and then partially decalciﬁed; the latter
process is likely tied to the phosphatisation visible in the overlying sample MM4 from Units 8 and 9; (d,e) detail showing partially cemented calcitic ashes, with arrows pointing to
individual ash rhombs in (d). At right is a fragment of bone with recrystallised ash in the voids (PPL and XPL, respectively). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(2009b), colluviation at this site is associated with slopewash
processes that are driven by the hydrological dynamics of the karst
system. Our micro-scale study has revealed high frequencies of clay
and ﬁne-silt aggregates that were reworked by the erosive action of
surface water ﬂow. These clay aggregates are clearly derived from
different sources, and a range of processes are likely to be
responsible for their transportation, including slopewash, gravity
and occasional small-scale mudﬂow events. Where we observe
different types of aggregates in thin section, future research will
aim to isolate the relative contributions of different source materials. We note that other materials can also contribute to the
composition of the colluvium, including weathered limestone and
speleothem fragments, occasional tephra shards and anthropogenic inclusions such as charcoal, burnt bone fragments and stone
artefacts.
It should be borne in mind that, for colluviation to occur, there
has to be relief within the cave system and this relief was most
likely initiated by a phase of incision by the Wae Racang followed
by slumping and subsidence of the newly exposed and truncated
deposits. Periods of stabilisation, perhaps marked by ﬂowstone
formation, could indicate intervals when relief was reduced due to
the inﬁlling of the front chamber depo-centre, possibly linked to
reorganisation of the ﬂuvial system or internal karst hydrology, or
due to blocking of the entrance by landslides and/or roof collapse
near the cave entrance.
Alternation between colluviation and ﬂowstone precipitation
has been recognised at other tropical cave sites in Southeast Asia
and Australasia. At the site of Selminum Tem in western New
Guinea, Gillieson (1986) recorded a recurring sequence of deposits,
initially with a mass movement, followed by slopewash sedimentation and, ﬁnally, by ﬂowstone formation. Postulating the driver of
this sequence, he asked if “this sequence reﬂects events in small
catchments feeding the phreatic passage, then hillslope erosion is
largely accomplished by periodic phases of instability, resulting in
pulses of sediment moving out of the catchment” (1986: 542). This
explanation may explain the depositional sequence observed thus
far at Liang Bua (or at least in part). Given the variety in fabric of

small clayey clasts recorded in the colluvium, pulses of sediment
slumping and washing through the ﬁssures and chambers at the
rear of the site may have occurred during periods of instability. In
this scenario, capping ﬂowstones form when stability is achieved
and sediment availability is reduced, which could be linked to
decreased monsoon frequency and/or intensity, a reduction in
sediment accommodation space at the site, or some combination of
these factors.

5.2.2. Speleothem formation
Speleothems are a common occurrence among the deposits at
Liang Bua. These include dense clusters of stalactites precipitated
over much of the ceiling of the cave, buried tabular ﬂowstones that
conform to the buried cave ﬂoor topography, and large, localised
stalagmitic masses growing on the cave ﬂoor. The conﬁguration and
alignment of stalactites on the ceiling of the cave has been discussed previously (Westaway et al., 2009a). Positive phototropism
is cited as the mechanism responsible for the growing angle of the
stalactites formed near the entrance since the site was ﬁrst exposed
to sunlight. Whether uranium-series ages can be obtained from
these speleothems to further constrain the timing of the opening of
the cave to the sub-aerial environment requires further
investigation.
The formation of tabular ﬂowstones on top of Units 2, 3, 4 and 8
may be driven by a number of processes, including an increase in
CaCO3-charged ﬂowing water, a reduction in porosity of the surface
and sub-surface sediments, or a change in the topography of the
cave ﬂoor. Gillieson (1986) linked the inception of ﬂowstone formation in caves in the New Guinea highlands to time gaps in
sediment deposition, which may similarly play a part in ﬂowstone
formation at Liang Bua.
Recent work has shown that ﬂowstone formation can be inﬂuenced by biological processes (see, for example, Northup and
Lavoie, 2001; Taborosi, 2006). Formation of the calcareous
laminae observed in MM8 is likely to have been biologically
mediated, given their afﬁnities to the ‘encrusted’ stalactites recorded in cave environments in southern Thailand (Taborosi et al.,

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

137

Fig. 10. Thin section of MM4B from Units 8 and 9. Macroscans in normal (a) and dark ﬁeld (b) view. The lighter, centre part consists of a cm-thick band of ﬂowstone, which has been
decalciﬁed (shown by dissolution voids) and also phosphatised. The dark staining beneath is secondary manganese oxide. Both phosphate and Mn oxides are common diagenetic biproducts associated with leaching and the presence of bat guano. The upper part is composed of loose aggregates of angular clay clasts and rests on the phosphatic zone with a
sharp, erosional contact; it is extensively bioturbated. The clay aggregates are similar in composition to the sediments at the bottom of the slide, although the latter are calcareous
and contain some limestone fragments. The dark ﬁeld scan highlights the light-coloured, calcareous deposits at the base, which contain limestone grains and have been bioturbated.
Note the lack of reﬂection of the decalciﬁed ﬂowstone that is now phosphatic; (c, d) shows vughs that attest to dissolution of the carbonate and subsequent coating of slightly ironrich, yellow-brown calcareous silt (PPL and XPL, respectively); (e) Raman (left) and FTIR spectra showing the distribution of clay, phosphate and manganese oxide throughout the
sample; (f) phosphatised ﬂowstone (PPL); (g) phosphatic zone showing ghosts of the original calcite grains that now have low-order birefringence of apatite (XPL). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

2005). At present, however, we do not have thin sections of other
calcareous, non-phosphatised ﬂowstones at Liang Bua. Further
sampling should assess the role of organisms (e.g., algae and
mosses) in their formation, as well as their palaeoenvironmental
ramiﬁcations. The presence of biological carbonate structures in
sample MM7 suggests that the front brow of the cave was open at
this time, allowing light into the rear of the cave. Once a ﬂowstone
is sufﬁciently well-developed vertically and laterally to form an
impermeable barrier to sub-surface ﬂow, it could act to concentrate
and accelerate surface water ﬂow to lower-lying areas of the cave
and increase the potential to erode unconsolidated sediments. This
may have implications, therefore, for the erosion of other strata
nearer to the front of the cave. The presence of ﬁne plant ﬁlaments
on the surface of bedrock or existing ﬂowstones, which would trap
water ﬂowing slowly across its surface, explains the propensity of
ﬂowstones at Liang Bua to form on steeply angled surfaces.
A massive stalagmite that exists on the present cave ﬂoor just to
the east of Sector XXIV is a substantial carbonate accretion that

resembles a stromatolitic stalagmitedthe so-called ‘lobsters’ or
‘craybacks’ discussed in Taborosi (2006). The growth of these
structures is linked to the photosynthetic activity of cyanobacteria,
again suggesting the possibility of obtainingdvia uranium-series
datingda minimum age for the opening of the cave.

5.2.3. Diagenesis and other post-depositional modiﬁcations
Diagenetic features recorded in thin sections were identiﬁed
chieﬂy in the upper third of Sector XXIV’s stratigraphic sequence.
The heavily phosphatised ﬂowstone capping Unit 8 is associated
pez-Gonza
lez et al.,
with manganese oxide precipitation (e.g., Lo
2006; Karkanas et al., 2008; White et al., 2009; Karkanas and
Goldberg, 2010) and is most likely related to guano accumulation
on the ﬂowstone surface after it formed (e.g., Ford and Williams,
2007; Karkanas and Goldberg, 2010). It is not only the ﬂowstone
that has been subject to dissolution in this acidic environmentddissolution of limestone blocks in the sediments immediately beneath and above this ﬂowstone (i.e., the upper part of Unit 8

138

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

and lower part of Unit 9) has resulted in the formation of ‘ghosts’ of
these clasts (Fig. 10g). In addition, we observed decalciﬁcation of
the matrix in the sediments immediately beneath the ﬂowstone.
We also observed a laminar void situated between the upper surface of this ﬂowstone and the immediately overlying, ﬁne-grained
colluvial sediments, possibly indicating erosion of the guano by
water ﬂowing across this hard surface. Why this type of diagenesis
occurs only in the upper part of the sequencedat least in this part
of the cavedis as yet unknown. However, it may relate to a shift in
environmental conditions in the cave that catalysed an acidic
environment in association with the addition of bat guano. Bats are
regular inhabitants of the cave today and their skeletal remains
have been recovered consistently throughout the depositional
sequence, including multiple species of fruit and insectivorous bats
(van den Bergh et al., 2009).
5.2.4. Combustion features and ﬁre-use
Micromorphological evidence of ﬁre-use by hominins is
restricted to Units 5e8 (the isolated occurrences of charcoal in Unit
2 cannot unequivocally be associated with hominin activity), which
represent a temporal interval (~41e24 ka) that is characterised by
drier palaeoenvironmental conditions (Westaway et al., 2009a).
The intact combustion feature sampled between Units 5 and 6
exhibits a tripartite sequence highly diagnostic of an in situ ﬁreplace. Interestingly, this feature contains very low frequencies of
burnt or calcined bone compared to similar features found in some
other caves (e.g., Goldberg et al., 2009; Berna et al., 2012; Miller
et al., 2013). Elsewhere in Southeast Asia, evidence for ﬁre-use
has been recognised at sites on Borneo and the Philippines
(Stephens et al., 2005, 2017; Mijares and Lewis, 2009), although this
has
been
limited
to
individual
diagnosticdbut
disassociateddcomponents (e.g., baked sediment, ash and charcoal
fragments).
Higher up the sequence, in Unit 7, we recorded dense concentrations of disaggregated combustion material that likely relate to
ﬁreplace cleaning, surface trampling or colluviation. Hominin activity in the rear of the cave is perhaps unsurprising as it would
have formed elevated ground, high and dry above lower-lying areas
around the cave mouth and eastern wall, where pools of standing
water and/or muddy conditions unfavourable to subsistence activities might have existed. Such high ground would also have
served well as a vantage point from which to survey the fringes of
the valley, allowing for the early warning of approaching prey or
possibly komodo dragons, the only known large predator on Flores
and nearby islands during the Quaternary (Hocknull et al., 2009).
These combustion features represent the oldest unequivocal
evidence of hearth-like structures at Liang Bua. Although the use of
ﬁre at Liang Bua has previously been attributed to H. ﬂoresiensis
(Morwood et al., 2004, 2005), the current stratigraphic and chronological interpretation of the site (Sutikna et al., 2016) and analyses of the recovered ﬁndings raise doubts about the validity of
this claim. The ‘charred bones’ initially reported by Morwood et al.
(2004, 2005) within the H. ﬂoresiensis-bearing deposits are clearly
the result of manganese staining, and no deﬁnitive evidence of
burnt faunal remains has been recovered during subsequent excavations of these deposits. Similarly, analyses of the “clusters of
reddened and ﬁre-cracked rocks” (Morwood et al., 2005:1012) from
within the H. ﬂoresiensis-bearing sediments have demonstrated
that these stones were not exposed to any signiﬁcant heat source
(Roberts et al., 2009). Furthermore, the most extensive study so far

Fig. 11. Schematic illustration depicting the changing depositional environments at
Liang Bua as observed in the micromorphological record, supplemented with data
from Westaway et al. (2009b). Age estimates are as shown in Fig. 3.

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

of the Liang Bua stone artefact assemblages (Moore et al., 2009)
found a marked discrepancy in terms of artefact exposure to ﬁre,
with negligible evidence (<1%) in assemblages associated with
H. ﬂoresiensis remains, versus almost 18% of stone artefacts of Holocene age attributed to modern humans.
Given the available evidence, we suggest that the use of ﬁre at
Liang Buadparticularly the construction of hearth-like structures
that were presumably used for warmth and/or cookingdis more
likely a behavioural signature of modern humans than of
H. ﬂoresiensis. Although this hypothesis requires conﬁrmation by
additional investigation at Liang Bua and elsewhere on Flores, the
micromorphological evidence from Sector XXIV suggests that
modern humans were present on Flores by ~41 ka cal. BP or shortly
thereafter. If correct, these data corroborate the presence of modern humans in Island Southeast Asia during the last 40 millennia, as
reported for sites in Laos, Borneo, the Philippines, Sulawesi, Timor,
Papua New Guinea and Australia (Fox, 1970; Roberts et al., 1990,
1994; Turney et al., 2001; Dizon et al., 2002; Bowler et al., 2003;
troit et al., 2004; Storm et al., 2005, 2013; Barker et al., 2007;
De
Summerhayes et al., 2010; O’Connor et al., 2011; Barker, 2013;
Aubert et al., 2014; Allen and O’Connell, 2014; Clarkson et al.,
2015; Demeter et al., 2015; Hiscock, 2015; O’Connell and Allen,
2015; O’Connor, 2015).
Much of the research concerning hominin use of ﬁre originates
from sites in arid, semi-arid and temperate climatic zones. In humid
tropical Sri Lanka, combustion features have been recorded in
Kitulgala Beli-lena rockshelter, where neither bones nor ash are
preserved and the “absence of microscopic bone fragments contrasts sharply with the abundance of larger bone ﬁnds on site”
(Kourampas et al., 2009: 692). Whether this is a function of accelerated diagenetic processes occurring at tropical sites, or reﬂects
the fact that meat processing was not the primary purpose of these
ﬁres, remains an open question. Moreover, further work is warranted to explore the precise baseline conditions that promote or
hinder bone preservation, and the potential bi-products or markers
of bone dissolution processes (e.g., Stiner et al., 2001).
5.2.5. Volcanic activity
Sutikna et al. (2016) proposed that multiple processes were
responsible for the emplacement of tephra T3 at Liang Bua, with the
upper sub-unit associated with a period of water pooling and minor, localised reworking within the cave. This interpretation is
consistent with the evidence of wetter conditions indicated by the
micromorphological analysis of this stratum (Unit 3). However,
given the absence of water-derived laminae and the generally pure
composition of the tephra in this area, it is possible that this
remnant of T3 preserved in the rear of the cave is still in primary,
wind-emplaced position, with the reworked upper portion of T3
conﬁned to lower-lying areas of the site. A discrete band of impure
tephra, observed ~5 mm above the primary fall, may indicate minor
reworking of T3 by sheetwash or represent evidence of a small,
secondary fall-out event. At Dalan Serkot Cave on Luzon in the
Philippines, Mijares and Lewis (2009) used micromorphology to
identify a volcanic ash layer that displays grading characteristics,
which they claim are consistent with reworking by ﬂowing water.
At Liang Bua, it is an open question whether the blanket of tephra
across much of the cave ﬂoor and the catchment area disrupted
processes driving sedimentation within the cave, but colluviation
was likely sufﬁciently persistent to bury at least the distal end of T3
before other parts of it were eroded by other sub-aerial
mechanisms.
5.2.6. Cave ﬂoor topography and relief
The ﬂoors of caves and rockshelters commonly exhibit complex
topographies. This is nowhere more prevalent than in humid

139

tropical regions where cut, ﬁll and slumping eventsdoften associated with marked changes in seasonal precipitationdcan create
dramatic topographic features and highly irregular cave ﬂoor surfaces (e.g., Glover, 1979; Gillieson, 1986; Barker et al., 2005;
Stephens et al., 2005; Gilbertson et al., 2005). Previous work at
Liang Bua has shown that the topography of the cave ﬂoor was
highly irregular prior to, and in the early stages of, inﬁlling with
sediments and chemical precipitates (Westaway et al., 2009b). This
topographic template dictated sediment deposition during the ﬁnal
Late and terminal Middle Pleistocene, with clastic material
funnelled down and through conduits and channels in the limestone ﬂoor of the cave, and between large boulders and stalagmites
(e.g., Westaway et al., 2009a,b). This topography would have
regulated the erosional capabilities of overland ﬂow. The stratigraphic sequence of excavated sediments along the eastern wall of
the cave is more than 11 m deep (Morwood et al., 2009; Westaway
et al., 2009b; Sutikna et al., 2016) and this area appears to have
acted as a low-lying sediment depo-centreda local ‘sink’ for sediments delivered from the rear, and most likely also from the front,
of the cave. This scenario suggests that if the cave originally formed
as a collapsed doline, then the rim of this chamber is likely to be
preserved beneath the front aperture.
At least one major cut-and-ﬁll event has been recorded in the
cave that has had profound implications for the preservation of
archaeological sediments (Sutikna et al., 2016). This pattern of
repeated accumulation and erosion, often followed by slumping
and mass movements, is a common theme observed in many parts
of the stratigraphic sequence, which is similar to that recorded in
New Guinea by Gillieson (1986). Work is ongoing to identify the
geomorphic processes that drive these cut-and-ﬁll events, and to
ultimately link the sequence recorded inside the site to the river
valley outside. These are likely to include ﬂuctuations in water
throughput or ﬂow concentration from the rear of the cave to the
front, linked to a reorganisation of the karst hydrological system; a
change in the topographic template of the site, over which subsequent sediments are deposited; and/or a switch in the mode of
sediment deposition (e.g., from clastic to precipitate).
5.2.7. Correlation with palaeoenvironmental records in island
Southeast Asia
The results of this study are spatially constrained to a limited
area of the cave, so correlating changes in cave environment to the
wider catchment or regional climate record is necessarily tentative.
That said, we recognise three distinct phases of environmental
change in the sedimentological record at Liang Bua that appear to
be driven by reorganisation of the cave hydrology, presumablydbut not as yet demonstrablydlinked to ﬂuctuations in precipitation on Flores. Using the new radiocarbon chronology
presented here, we can provisionally correlate these hydrological
changes with isotopic (v18O and v13C) proxies measured on speleothems from Flores and Java (Westaway et al., 2007b, 2009a) and
make comparisons with other proxy palaeoenvironmental data
from Island Southeast Asia.
A marked switch from humid colluviation to gravel production
under a dry climate occurs in the sequence sometime after ~47 ka
and prior to ~41e38 ka. This may correlate with a period of
persistent groundwater conditions identiﬁed in the speleothem
record, with a peak in humidity occurring 44e41 ka (Westaway
et al., 2009a). The onset of autogenic gravel production and
calcareous sedimentation coincides with hominin ﬁre-use at Liang
Bua from ~41 to 38 ka and correlates with a signiﬁcant reduction in
humidity from ~39 ka (Westaway et al., 2009a). This drier period on
Flores may correlate with the dry conditions and abundant C4
grasses indicative of an open savannah-type landscape recorded on
Palawan in the Philippines (Wurster et al., 2010). In the Liang Bua

140

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

sedimentological record, we observe a return to humid colluviation
after 25e24 ka, perhaps as a southerly expression of the wet event
recorded on Palawan at ~23e21 ka (Bird et al., 2007; Lewis et al.,
2008). Stalagmite records from Flores show a sharp increase in
monsoonal precipitation after the LGM, with the interglacial atmospheric circulation system fully restored by ~13 ka (Westaway
et al., 2007b).
During the time period relevant here to hominin migrations into
(and out of) the region (~60e20 ka), maximum sea levels rarely
attained elevations closer than 50 m below current mean sea level
(Lambeck and Chappell, 2001). Such low sea levels suggest that
most of the Sunda Shelf was exposed throughout this period (Voris,
2000), thus permitting overland crossings as far east as the eastern
coasts of Bali and Borneo, possibly via an open savannah corridor
(Bird et al., 2005; Wurster and Bird, 2016). Further penetration
eastward at this time required sea crossings over the perilous
straits separating the Indonesian islands east of Wallace’s Line, or
across the longer (but potentially safer) passages from the north via
either the Philippines or Sulawesi, whether by choice or serendipitous circumstance (e.g., Birdsell, 1977; O’Connor, 2007;
O’Connell et al., 2010; Morwood and Jungers, 2009; Dennell et al.,
2014).
The environmental reconstruction for Liang Bua presented here
is insufﬁciently ﬁnely-resolved to correlate with extant, highresolution palaeoenvironmental datasets for Sunda and Wallacea,
although we have endeavoured to situate our ﬁndings within a
regional biogeographic and palaeoclimatic framework. A larger
data set is required to explore in more detail the relationship between on-site environmental change and precipitation-driven
reorganisation of the karst hydrologydthis will be the focus of
further study.
6. Conclusions
The results of this micromorphological study are derived from a
single area of Liang Bua (a 1 m-wide by ~4 m-deep proﬁle near the
rear of the site), which represents only a small fraction of the voluminous deposits preserved in the cave. Despite this modest window into the evolution of the site, the results substantiate and
reﬁne previous work, extending our knowledge of the depositional
and post-depositional history of the cave and of hominin activities
taking place at the site.
Field observations suggest that colluviated sediments are
derived primarily from the rear of the cave, and the micromorphological results show that these sediments were deposited during oscillations between drier and wetter conditions. Variations in
ﬂowstone morphologies are consistent with a variety of depositional processes, and these inferences are supported by observations of the thin sections, where thin laminae of biological
derivation are clearly visible. Localised bioturbation of the Liang
Bua depositional sequence is a typical occurrence, which is not
surprising given studies of other tropical cave sediments such as at
Niah Cave (Stephens et al., 2005, 2017). However, the degree to
which bioturbation has affected the integrity of the archaeological
evidence at Liang Bua appears to be minor, but further research on
these effects is warranted.
Results of ongoing work in different areas of the cave should
help reﬁne interpretations of the sedimentary dynamics at Liang
Bua. We have documented chemical diagenesis in the upper
20e35 cm of Unit 8 in Sector XXIV, but it remains to be shown if the
same processes occur to the same extentdif at alldin other parts of
the cave at the same or different depths and in other stratigraphic
units. Documenting phosphatisation, for example, is signiﬁcant in
revealing locations of roosting animals, the presence of erosion,
stabilisation of surfaces and gaps in the stratigraphic record (e.g.,

thin section MM4B). It may also be important for locating any regions of locally enhanced or reduced radioactivity, which could
inﬂuence the radionuclide concentrations in sediments and faunal
remains sampled for luminescence, electron-spin resonance and
uranium-series dating (e.g., Weiner et al., 2002).
Our micromorphological observations of combustion features
and bi-products from sediments dated to ~41e24 ka are of particular interest. First, the microstratigraphic organisation of these
features reveals that we are dealing with largely undisturbed
structures that can be used to make inferences about hominin
behaviour, such as the spatio-functional use of speciﬁc areas of the
site and food processing strategies. Second, the primary context of
the combustion features and their stratigraphic association with a
suite of new 14C ages suggests that modern humans are the most
likely candidates for this ﬁre-use. If this hypothesis is borne out by
further research, then the initial arrival of modern humans at Liang
Bua can be extended to at least ~41 ka cal. BP. As the gap narrows
between the time of arrival of modern humans and the latest parts
of the H. ﬂoresiensis sequence (~50 ka; Sutikna et al., 2016), ongoing
investigations at the site will address the question of whether deposits of intermediate age contain any evidence of overlap and
interaction between the two hominin groups.
Acknowledgements
We thank the following for funding support: the Australian
Research Council for an Australian Laureate Fellowship
(FL130100116) to R.G.R., the University of Wollongong for a postgraduate scholarship to T.S., the Canada Research Chairs Program to
M.W.T., the Smithsonian Institution’s Scholarly Studies Program to
M.W.T. and the Waitt Foundation/National Geographic Society
(grant 2121-2) to M.W.T and T.S. Additional funding was provided
by the Peter Buck Fund for Human Origins Research and the
Smithsonian Institution’s Human Origins Program. We also thank I
Made Geria, V.N. Sene, I Dewa Kompiang and the entire Liang Bua
Team from Teras, Golo Manuk and Bere. Fieldwork was authorised
by Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional (Jakarta, Indonesia) and
Pemerintah Daerah Kabupaten Manggarai (Flores, Nusa Tenggara
Timur).
References
Allen, J., O’Connell, J.F., 2014. Both half right: updating the evidence for dating ﬁrst
human arrivals in Sahul. Aust. Archaeol. 79, 86e108.
Aubert, M., Brumm, A., Ramli, M., Sutikna, T., Saptomo, E.W., Hakim, B., Dosseto, A.,
2014. Pleistocene cave art from Sulawesi, Indonesia. Nature 514 (7521),
223e227.
Barker, G., 2013. Rainforest foraging and farming in Island Southeast Asia. In:
McDonald Institute Monographs, vol. 1. McDonald Institute of Archaeological
Research, Cambridge.
Barker, G., Barton, H., Bird, M., Daly, P., Datan, I., Dykes, A., Farr, L., Gilbertson, D.,
Harrisson, B., Hunt, C., Higham, T., 2007. The ‘human revolution’ in lowland
tropical Southeast Asia: the antiquity and behaviour of anatomically modern
humans at Niah Cave (Sarawak, Borneo). J. Hum. Evol. 52 (3), 243e261.
Bellwood, P., 2014. First Migrants: Ancient Migration in Global Perspective. John
Wiley & Sons.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., Horwitz, L.K., Brink, J., Holt, S., Bamford, M., Chazan, M., 2012.
Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk cave, northern Cape province, South Africa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
109 (20), E1215eE1220.
Bird, M.I., Taylor, D., Hunt, C., 2005. Palaeoenvironments of insular Southeast Asia
during the last glacial period: a savanna corridor in Sundaland? Quat. Sci. Rev.
24 (20), 2228e2242.
Bird, M.I., Boobyer, E.M., Bryant, C., Lewis, H.A., Paz, V., Stephens, W.E., 2007. A long
record of environmental change from bat guano deposits in Makangit Cave,
Palawan, Philippines. Earth Environ. Sci. Trans. R. Soc. Edinb. 98 (01), 59e69.
Birdsell, J.B., 1977. The Recalibration of a Paradigm for the First Peopling of Greater
Australia. In: Sunda and Sahul: Prehistoric Studies in Southeast Asia, Melanesia,
and Australia, pp. 113e167.
Boivin, N., Fuller, D.Q., Dennell, R., Allaby, R., Petraglia, M.D., 2013. Human dispersal
across diverse environments of Asia during the upper Pleistocene. Quat. Int.
300, 32e47.

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142
Bowler, J.M., Johnston, H., Olley, J.M., Prescott, J.R., Roberts, R.G., Shawcross, W.,
Spooner, N.A., 2003. New ages for human occupation and climatic change at
Lake Mungo, Australia. Nature 421, 837e840.
Brown, P., Sutikna, T., Morwood, M.J., Soejono, R.P., Jatmiko, Saptomo, E.W.,
Due, R.A., 2004. A new small-bodied hominin from the Late Pleistocene of
Flores, Indonesia. Nature 431, 1055e1061.
Buciuman, F., Patcas, F., Craciun, R., Zahn, D.R.T., 1998. Vibrational spectroscopy of
bulk and supported manganese oxides. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1, 185e190.
Clark, P.U., Dyke, A.S., Shakun, J.D., Carlson, A.E., Clark, J., Wohlfarth, B.,
Mitrovica, J.X., Hostetler, S.W., McCabe, A.M., 2009. The last glacial maximum.
Science 325, 710e714.
Clarkson, C., Smith, M., Marwick, B., Fullagar, R., Wallis, L.A., Faulkner, P., Manne, T.,
Hayes, E., Roberts, R.G., Jacobs, Z., Carah, X., 2015. The archaeology, chronology
and stratigraphy of Madjedbebe (Malakunanja II): a site in northern Australia
with early occupation. J. Hum. Evol. 83, 46e64.
Cooper, A., Stringer, C.B., 2013. Did the Denisovans cross Wallace’s line? Science 342
(6156), 321e323.
Demeter, F., Shackelford, L., Westaway, K., Duringer, P., Bacon, A.M., Ponche, J.L.,
Wu, X., Sayavongkhamady, T., Zhao, J.-X., Barnes, L., Boyon, M.,
Sichanthongtip, P., Senegas, F., Karpoff, A.-M., Patole-Edoumba, E., Coppen, Y.,
Braga, J., 2015. Early modern humans and morphological variation in Southeast
Asia: fossil evidence from Tam Pa Ling, Laos. PLoS One 10 (4), e0121193.
Dennell, R., Petraglia, M.D., 2012. The dispersal of Homo sapiens across southern
Asia: how early, how often, how complex? Quat. Sci. Rev. 47, 15e22.
Dennell, R.W., Louys, J., O’Regan, H.J., Wilkinson, D.M., 2014. The origins and
persistence of Homo ﬂoresiensis on Flores: biogeographical and ecological perspectives. Quat. Sci. Rev. 96, 98e107.
troit, F., Dizon, E., Falgue
res, C., Hameau, S., Ronquillo, W., Se
mah, F., 2004. Upper
De
Pleistocene Homo sapiens from the Tabon cave (Palawan, the Philippines):
description and dating of new discoveries. Comptes Rendus Palevol 3 (8),
705e712.
troit, F., Se
mah, F., Falgue
res, C., Hameau, S., Ronquillo, W., Cabanis, E.,
Dizon, E., De
2002. Notes on the morphology and age of the Tabon Cave fossil Homo sapiens.
Curr. Anthropol. 43 (4), 660e666.
Ford, D., Williams, P.D., 2007. Karst Hydrogeology and Geomorphology. John Wiley
& Sons.
Fox, R.B., 1970. The Tabon caves: archaeological explorations and excavations on
Palawan island, Philippines. Natl. Mus. Philipp. Monogr. (No. 1)
Gilbertson, D., Bird, M., Hunt, C., McLaren, S., Banda, R.M., Pyatt, B., Rose, J.,
Stephens, M., 2005. Past human activity and geomorphological change in a
guano-rich tropical cave mouth: initial interpretations of the Late Quaternary
succession in the Great Cave of Niah, Sarawak. Asian Perspect. 16e41.
Gillieson, D., 1986. Cave sedimentation in the New Guinea highlands. Earth Surf.
Process. Landforms 11 (5), 533e543.
Glover, I.C., 1979. The effects of sink action on archaeological deposits in caves: an
Indonesian example. World Archaeol. 10 (3), 302e317.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L.,
2009. Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance in the middle stone age of Sibudu
cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 1 (2), 95e122.
Goldberg, P., Aldeias, V., 2016. Why does (archaeological) micromorphology have
such little traction in (geo)archaeology? Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. (online, in
press).
Groucutt, H.S., Petraglia, M.D., Bailey, G., Scerri, E.M., Parton, A., Clark-Balzan, L.,
Jennings, R.P., Lewis, L., Blinkhorn, J., Drake, N.A., Breeze, P.S., Inglis, R.H.,
Deves, M.H., Meredith-Williams, M., Boivin, N., Thomas, M.G., Scally, A., 2015.
Rethinking the dispersal of Homo sapiens out of Africa. Evol. Anthropol. 24 (4),
149e164.
Hiscock, P., 2015. Cultural diversiﬁcation and the global dispersion of Homo sapiens:
lessons from Australia. In: Kaifu, Y., Izuho, M., Goebel, T., Sato, H., Ono, A. (Eds.),
Emergence and Diversity of Modern Human Behaviour in Paleolithic Asia. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station, pp. 225e236.
Hocknull, S.A., Piper, P.J., van den Bergh, G.D., Due, R.A., Morwood, M.J.,
Kurniawan, I., 2009. Dragon’s Paradise Lost: Palaeobiogeography, evolution and
extinction of the Largest-ever terrestrial Lizards (Varanidae). PLoS One 4 (9),
e7241.
Hogg, A.G., Hua, Q., Blackwell, P.G., Niu, M., Buck, C.E., Guilderson, T.P., Heaton, T.J.,
Palmer, J.G., Reimer, P.J., Reimer, R.W., Turney, C.S.M., Zimmerman, S.R.H., 2013.
SHCal13 Southern Hemisphere calibration, 0e50,000 years cal BP. Radiocarbon
55, 1889e1903.
Karkanas, P., Goldberg, P., 2010. Phosphatic features. In: Stoops, G., Mees, F. (Eds.),
Interpretation of Micromorphological Features of Soils and Regoliths. Elsevier
B.V, pp. 521e541.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.P., Simek, J.F., Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., 2002. Ash bones and
guano: a study of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of Grotte XVI,
Dordogne, France. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29 (7), 721e732.
Karkanas, P., Schepartz, L.A., Miller-Antonio, S., Wang, W., Huang, W., 2008. Late
middle Pleistocene climate in southwestern China: inferences from the stratigraphic record of Panxian Dadong cave, Guizhou. Quat. Sci. Rev. 27 (15e16),
1555e1570.
Kourampas, N., Simpson, I.A., Perera, N., Deraniyagala, S.U., Wijeyapala, W.H., 2009.
Rockshelter sedimentation in a dynamic tropical landscape: late PleistoceneeEarly Holocene archaeological deposits in Kitulgala Beli-lena, southwestern
Sri Lanka. Geoarchaeology 24 (6), 677e714.
Lambeck, K., Chappell, J., 2001. Sea level change through the last glacial cycle.
Science 292 (5517), 679e686.

141

Lewis, H., Johnson, K., Ronquillo, W., 2008. Preliminary results of speleothem dating
from Tabon cave, Palawan, Philippines: moisture increase at the last glacial
maximum. Hukay 12, 35e50.
pez-Gonza
lez, F., Grandal-d’Anglade, A., Vidal-Romaní, J.R., 2006. Deciphering
Lo
bone depositional sequences in caves through the study of manganese coatings.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 33 (5), 707e717.
Mijares, A.S.B., Lewis, H.A., 2009. Cave sites in northeastern Luzon, Philippines: a
preliminary soil micromorphological study. Asian Perspect. 48 (1), 98e118.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N.J., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2009. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
modiﬁed combustion features. Palethnologie 2009, 25e37.
Miller, C.E., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2013. Geoarchaeological investigations at Diepkloof rock Shelter, western Cape, South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (9),
3432e3452.
Moore, M.W., Sutikna, T., Jatmiko, Morwood, M.J., Brumm, A., 2009. Continuities in
stone ﬂaking technology at Liang Bua, Flores, Indonesia. J. Hum. Evol. 57,
503e526.
Morley, M.W., Woodward, J.C., 2011. The Campanian Ignimbrite (Y5) tephra at
Crvena Stijena rockshelter, Montenegro. Quat. Res. 75 (3), 683e696.
Morwood, M.J., Jungers, W.L., 2009. Conclusions: implications of the Liang Bua
excavations for hominin evolution and biogeography. J. Hum. Evol. 57,
640e648.
Morwood, M.J., Soejono, R.P., Roberts, R.G., Sutikna, T., Turney, C.S.M.,
Westaway, K.E., Rink, W.J., Zhao, J.X., van den Bergh, G.D., Due, R.A., Hobbs, D.R.,
Moore, M.W., Bird, M.I., Fiﬁeld, L.K., 2004. Archaeology and age of a new
hominin from Flores in eastern Indonesia. Nature 431, 1087e1091.
Morwood, M.J., Brown, P., Jatmiko, Sutikna T., Saptomo, E.W., Westaway, K.E.,
Due, R.A., Roberts, R.G., Maeda, T., Wasisto, S., Djubiantono, T., 2005. Further
evidence for small-bodied hominins from the late Pleistocene of Flores,
Indonesia. Nature 437, 1012e1017.
Morwood, M.J., Sutikna, T., Saptomo, E.W., Jatmiko, Hobbs, D.R., Westaway, K.E.,
2009. Preface: research at Liang Bua, Flores, Indonesia. J. Hum. Evol. 57,
437e449.
Northup, E., Lavoie, D., 2001. Geomicrobiology of caves: a review. Geomicrobiol. J. 18
(3), 199e222.
O’Connell, J.F., Allen, J., Hawkes, K., 2010. Pleistocene Sahul and the origins of
seafaring. In: Anderson, A., Barrett, J.H., Boyle, K.V. (Eds.), The Global Origins
and Development of Seafaring. McDonald Institute of Archaeological Research,
Cambridge, pp. 57e68.
O’Connell, J.F., Allen, J., 2015. The process, biotic impact, and global implications of
the human colonization of Sahul about 47,000 years ago. J. Archaeol. Sci. 56,
73e84.
O’Connor, S., 2007. New evidence from East Timor contributes to our understanding
of earliest modern human colonisation east of the Sunda Shelf. Antiquity 81,
523e535.
O’Connor, S., 2015. Crossing the Wallace line: the maritime skills of the earliest
colonists in the Wallacean Archipelago. In: Kaifu, Y., Izuho, M., Goebel, T.,
Sato, H., Ono, A. (Eds.), Emergence and Diversity of Modern Human Behaviour
in Paleolithic Asia. Texas A&M Univ. Press, College Station, pp. 214e224.
O’Connor, S., Ono, R., Clarkson, C., 2011. Pelagic ﬁshing at 42,000 years before the
present and the maritime skills of modern humans. Science 334, 1117e1121.
Reyes-Centeno, H., Hubbe, M., Hanihara, T., Stringer, C., Harvati, K., 2015. Testing
modern human out-of-Africa dispersal models and implications for modern
human origins. J. Hum. Evol. 87, 95e106.
Roberts, R.G., Jones, R., Smith, M.A., 1990. Thermoluminescence dating of a 50,000year-old human occupation site in northern Australia. Nature 345, 153e156.
Roberts, R.G., Jones, R., Spooner, N.A., Head, M.J., Murray, A.S., Smith, M.A., 1994. The
human colonisation of Australia: optical dates of 53,000 and 60,000 years
bracket human arrival at Deaf Adder Gorge, Northern Territory. Quat. Sci. Rev. 13
(5), 575e583.
Roberts, R.G., Westaway, K.E., Zhao, J.-X., Turney, C.S., Bird, M.I., Rink, W.J.,
Fiﬁeld, L.K., 2009. Geochronology of cave deposits at Liang Bua and of adjacent
river terraces in the Wae Racang valley, western Flores, Indonesia: a synthesis
of age estimates for the type locality of Homo ﬂoresiensis. J. Hum. Evol. 57 (5),
484e502.
Sauer, G.R., Zunic, W.B., Durig, J.R., Wuthier, R.E., 1994. Fourier Transform Raman
spectroscopy of synthetic and biological calcium phosphates. Calcif. Tissue Int.
54, 414e420.
Stephens, M., Rose, J., Gilbertson, D.D., Canti, M.G., 2005. Micromorphology of cave
sediments in the humid tropics: Niah cave, Sarawak. Asian Perspect. 44 (1),
42e55.
Stephens, M., Rose, J., Gilbertson, D.D., 2017. Post-depositional alteration of humid
tropical cave sediments: micromorphological research in the Great Cave of
Niah, Sarawak, Borneo. J. Archaeol. Sci. 77, 109e124.
Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S.L., Surovell, T.A., Goldberg, P., Meignen, L., Weiner, S., BarYosef, O., 2001. Bone preservation in Hayonim Cave (Israel): a macroscopic and
mineralogical study. J. Archaeol. Sci. 28 (6), 643e659.
Storm, P., Aziz, F., de Vos, J., Kosasih, D., Baskoro, S., van den Hoek Ostende, L.W.,
2005. Late Pleistocene Homo sapiens in a tropical rainforest fauna in east Java.
J. Hum. Evol. 49 (4), 536e545.
Storm, P., Wood, R., Stringer, C., Bartsiokas, A., de Vos, J., Aubert, M., Kinsley, L.,
Grün, R., 2013. U-series and radiocarbon analyses of human and faunal remains
from Wajak, Indonesia. J. Hum. Evol. 64 (5), 356e365.
Stuiver, M., Reimer, P. J., & Reimer, R. W. (2016). CALIB 7.1. [WWW program and
documentation], http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/.

142

M.W. Morley et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 77 (2017) 125e142

Summerhayes, G.R., Leavesley, M., Fairbairn, A., Mandui, H., Field, J., Ford, A.,
Fullagar, R., 2010. Human adaptation and plant use in highland New Guinea
49,000 to 44,000 years ago. Science 330 (6000), 78e81.
Stoops, G., 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith Thin
Sections. Soil Science Society of America, Madison, WI.
Sutikna, T., Tocheri, M.W., Morwood, M.J., Saptomo, E.W., Jatmiko, Due, R.A.,
Wasisto, S., Westaway, K.E., Aubert, M., Li, B., Zhao, J.-X., Storey, M.,
Alloway, B.V., Morley, M.W., Meijer, H.J.M., van den Bergh, G.D., Grün, R.,
Dosseto, A., Brumm, A., Jungers, W.L., Roberts, R.G., 2016. Revised stratigraphy
and chronology for Homo ﬂoresiensis at Liang Bua in Indonesia. Nature 532,
366e369.
Taborosi, D., Hirakawa, K., Sawagaki, T., 2005. Carbonate precipitation along a
microclimatic gradient in a Thailand cavedcontinuum of calcareous tufa and
speleothems. J. Cave Karst Stud. 67 (1), 69e87.
Taborosi, D., 2006. Biologically inﬂuenced carbonate speleothems. Geol. Soc. Am.
Spec. Pap. 404, 307e317.
Turney, C.S.M., Bird, M.I., Fiﬁeld, L.K., Roberts, R.G., Smith, M., Dortch, C.E., Grün, R.,
Lawson, E., Ayliffe, L.K., Miller, G.H., Dortch, J., Cresswell, R.G., 2001. Early human occupation at Devil’s Lair, southwestern Australia 50,000 years ago. Quat.
Res. 55, 3e13.
, K., van den
van den Bergh, G.D., Meijer, H.J.M., Awe, R.D., Morwood, M.J., Szabo
Hoek Ostende, L.W., Sutikna, T., Saptomo, E.W., Piper, P.J., Dobney, K.M., 2009.
The Liang Bua faunal remains: a 95 k. yr. sequence from Flores, East Indonesia.
J. Hum. Evol. 57 (5), 527e537.
Voris, H.K., 2000. Maps of Pleistocene sea levels in Southeast Asia: shorelines, river
systems and time durations. J. Biogeogr. 27 (5), 1153e1167.

Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2002. Three-dimensional distribution of
minerals in the sediments of Hayonim Cave, Israel: diagenetic processes and
archaeological implications. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29, 1289e1308.
Westaway, K.E., Morwood, M.J., Roberts, R.G., Zhao, J.-x., Sutikna, T., Saptomo, E.W.,
Rink, W.J., 2007a. Establishing the time of initial human occupation of Liang
Bua, western Flores, Indonesia. Quat. Geochronol. 2 (1), 337e343.
Westaway, K.E., Zhao, J.-x., Roberts, R.G., Chivas, A.R., Morwood, M.J., Sutikna, T.,
2007b. Initial speleothem results from western Flores and eastern Java,
Indonesia: were climate changes from 47 to 5 ka responsible for the extinction
of Homo ﬂoresiensis? J. Quat. Sci. 22 (5), 429e438.
Westaway, K.E., Roberts, R.G., Sutikna, T., Morwood, M.J., Drysdale, R., Zhao, J.-x.,
Chivas, A.R., 2009a. The evolving landscape and climate of western Flores: an
environmental context for the archaeological site of Liang Bua. J. Hum. Evol. 57
(5), 450e464.
Westaway, K.E., Sutikna, T., Saptomo, W.E., Morwood, M.J., Roberts, R.G., Hobbs, D.R.,
2009b. Reconstructing the geomorphic history of Liang Bua, Flores, Indonesia: a
stratigraphic interpretation of the occupational environment. J. Hum. Evol. 57
(5), 465e483.
White, W.B., Vito, C., Scheetz, B.E., 2009. The mineralogy and trace element
chemistry of black manganese oxide deposits from caves. J. Cave Karst Stud. 71
(2), 136e143.
Wurster, C.M., Bird, M.I., Bull, I.D., Creed, F., Bryant, C., Dungait, J.A., Paz, V., 2010.
Forest contraction in north equatorial Southeast Asia during the last glacial
period. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (35), 15508e15511.
Wurster, C.M., Bird, M.I., 2016. Barriers and bridges: early human dispersals in
equatorial SE Asia. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spl. Publ. 411 (1), 235e250.

