Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Preservation of fungi in archaeological charcoal
M. Moskal-del Hoyo a, *, M. Wachowiak b,1, R.A. Blanchette c, 2
a

Departament de Prehistòria i Arqueologia, Universitat de València, Avgda. Blasco Ibáñez 28, 46010 Valencia, Spain
Smithsonian Museum Conservation Institute, Smithsonian Institution, Museum Support Center, 4210 Silver Hill Road, Suitland, MD 20746, USA
c
Department of Plant Pathology, 1991 Upper Buford Circle, 495 Borlaug Hall, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108-6030, USA
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 4 November 2009
Received in revised form
12 February 2010
Accepted 15 February 2010

During the analysis of wood charcoal remains from archaeological sites, it is common to ﬁnd different
microorganisms and different forms of degradation present in the plant tissue. However, one may
encounter difﬁculties when attempting to identify these microorganisms and determine when their
attack occurred. This paper focuses on preservation aspects related to the microorganisms in wood and
demonstrates the structural changes that take place in different types of decayed wood after it was
converted into charcoal. The study seeks to determine whether the microbial attack found in archaeological woods took place before the burning of the wood or after. Burning experiments were conducted
using wood that had been decayed by various types of fungi including white-rot, brown-rot, and soft-rot.
The laboratory burnt wood samples showed decay patterns that were comparable to those observed in
archaeological charcoal samples, indicating that signs of fungal infestation and features of decay can be
preserved after burning with micromorphological details of mycelium and cell wall attack evident. This
indication may provide important information related to the gathering of deadwood as fuelwood. In
addition, examples of decayed wood preserved in archaeological charcoal assemblages are described.
Their relationship to the archaeological context and environmental conditions may suggest different
interpretative models concerning wood management strategies applied by past societies.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Wood charcoal
Fungal attack
Biodeterioration
Deadwood collection
Anthracology
Archaeobotany

1. Introduction
Anthracology is a discipline that investigates the remains of
wood charcoals from archaeological excavations and natural
deposits (Chabal et al., 1999). The charcoal is a ﬁnal product of the
carbonization process as well as a result of incomplete combustion
during the charring process (Braadbaart and Poole, 2008; Fengel and
Weneger, 1983; Smart and Hoffman, 1988). The charcoal retains the
anatomical structure of the wood and may permit its botanical
identiﬁcation. Their taxonomic identiﬁcation depends on anatomical characteristics of the species, the size of the charcoal fragments,
and their state of preservation (Chabal et al., 1999; Schweingruber,
1982). In the ﬁeld of anthracology, a special methodology that
advances both palaeoethnographical and palaeoenvironmental
information exists that has demonstrated the importance of charcoal analysis in archaeobotany and archaeology (Asouti and Austin,
2005; Badal García, 1992; Chabal, 1997; Chabal et al., 1999; Carrión

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 963983428/963864093; fax: þ34 96 3983887.
E-mail
addresses:
magdalena.moskal@uv.es
(M.
Moskal-del
Hoyo),
wachowiakm@si.edu (M. Wachowiak), robertb@umn.edu (R.A. Blanchette).
1
Tel.: þ1 301 238 1218.
2
Tel.: þ1 612 625 0202; fax: þ1 612 625 9728.
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2010.02.007

Marco, 2005; Figueiral and Mosbrugger, 2000; Heinz and
 ska-Zaja˛ c and Wasylikowa, 2005; Marguerie
Thièbault, 1998; Lityn
and Hunot, 2007; Ntinou, 2002; Smart and Hoffman, 1988).
One of the purposes of anthracological analysis is to gain
palaeoethnographic information about wood used by humans. For
example, in the case of fuelwood, there is an assumption that ﬁrewood gathering derives from simple necessity based on availability
and effort required rather than intentional selection of a particular
species of wood, which is called “Principle of Least Effort”
(Shackleton and Prins, 1992). Ethnographic studies have shown that
this important human activity depends on the wood's abundance,
the ease of collecting, and the ability to transport the wood. Deadwood recovered from a forest in the proximity to the habitation site
fulﬁlls these requirements, and the documentation of its gathering
may lead to the formulation of new hypotheses that permit
understanding the management of forest communities by past
societies (Asouti, 2005; Asouti and Austin, 2005; Salisbury and Jane,
1940; Théry-Parisot, 2001). Palaeoethnographic information concerning the use of deadwood recovered from forest ﬂoor or attached
to standing trees may be obtained after observing characteristic
features of the decayed wood such as changes in anatomical
structure and the presence of microorganisms, and determining if
the microbial attack took place before or after burning.

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

The main objective of the present study is to conﬁrm that hyphae
and other structures produced by microorganisms can be preserved
within the wood charcoal after the burning process. In previous
work, Schweingruber (1982, p. 204) had indicated that in charcoal,
fungal hyphae may be preserved in addition to structural features of
the wood. Also, Théry-Parisot (2001) conducted signiﬁcant experiments related to the detection of rotten wood and driftwood in
charcoaliﬁed samples. Théry-Parisot had demonstrated that hyphae
may be preserved in the charcoal fragments after the burning
process. This statement later served as a basis for an assessment of
the deadwood present in the anthracological assemblages (Badal,
2004; Carrión Marco, 2005). Reﬂectance microscopy is a promising method that may help to prove the microbial preservation
within the charcoal structure and may also serve as a technique that
can distinguish between burnt and uncharred material. In particular, the incidences of microbial and animal organs along with the
remnants of the arthropod's fecal pellets were documented in the
plant material. The analysis showed that both the aforementioned
materials and the charcoals exhibited high reﬂectance, conﬁrming
their charred conditions (Scott et al., 2000). Nonetheless, the way
the microbes are preserved in the charcoals still remains unclear.
Heiss and Oeggl (2008) recently performed studies on a fuelwood
used in prehistoric copper mines in which special attention was
paid to fungus-infected charcoal fragments. However, the evaluation of the pre-burning attack was based on the supposition that
“wood-decaying fungi are destroyed during the carbonization”
(Heiss and Oeggl, 2008, p. 214). Therefore, only the material in
which hyphal imprints are observed was taken into account in the
gatheredestored wood interpretation while charcoals with fungal
hyphae were considered to result from modern contamination.
Also, it was important to examine the charcoal fragments
to determine if characteristic patterns were preserved in the
anatomical structure of decayed wood. Many studies have
demonstrated special features related to the different types of wood
degradation observed in xylem (Blanchette et al., 1990; Blanchette,
2000, 2003; Eriksson et al., 1990) and it would be valuable to verify
if the same pattern could be documented in the wood structure
after charcoaliﬁcation. It is important to observe whether the
changes in microstructure of the cell walls (erosion or cavities) may
also be evident after burning, since homogenization of all cell layers
happens during this process. This objective may in turn conﬁrm
fungal actions in the wood before the burning process and thereby
indicate the use of infested wood by the humans in the past.
Finally, some examples of archaeological charcoals that exhibit
the characteristics of decayed wood are presented and discussed in
relation to their contexts.
2. Background
During the analysis of charcoal fragments, different groups of
organisms are usually observed within the anatomical structure of
the wood; however, their identiﬁcations and mode of attack are
difﬁcult to establish. These groups include mainly fungi, bacteria,
and animals such as insects or nematodes which are responsible
for degradation processes of living and dead plants in almost all
environments (Blanchette, 2000, 2003; Caneva et al., 2008;
Eriksson et al., 1990; Koestler et al., 2003). The microbial attack
observed in the charcoal might have happened at different times
and places. First, the infestation could have happened to the wood
before the burning process. In this case, the wood may have become
infested in its natural environments before being collected by
humans or after it was gathered and later stored. Second, the
charcoal could have been attacked by microorganisms during
a post-depositional period that could have included the deposition
in the soil at the archaeological site or in the museum environment

2107

after its excavation, or both (Blanchette, 2000; Badal, 2004;
Marguerie and Hunot, 2007; Théry-Parisot, 2001). Identiﬁcation
of the species, and knowing their ecological preferences, may help
determine the initial moment of attack, e.g., whether living trees,
deadwood, charcoal, humid or dry conditions, etc. Nevertheless,
many of the microorganisms exhibit similar anatomical characteristics or appear in rather broad natural environments that makes
their identiﬁcation quite uncertain (Alexopoulos et al., 1996;
Balows et al., 1992).
The largest groups of fungi which are responsible for wood
degradation belong to the Basidiomycetes, which attack both
angiosperms and gymnosperms, and can even decompose the
heartwood of living conifers. Other groups are representatives of
Ascomycetes and Deuteromycetes. In addition, bacteria may
degrade the wood, especially in environments which exclude
fungal competition. Bacteria may also take part in multi-organism
decomposition processes. On the basis of morphological changes
in wood caused by microbial attack, three major types of decay are
distinguished: brown-rot, white-rot, and soft-rot. Wood structure
and chemical composition have a major inﬂuence on microbial
attack since different microorganisms specialize in degrading
different wood components. The main structural components of
wood cell walls are polymeric which include cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and other minor polymeric substances. They are
located in different areas of the cell walls and their proportions vary
signiﬁcantly depending on cell types, plant group (angiosperms or
gymnosperms) or species. Brown-rot fungi preferentially decompose cellulose and hemicellulose (polysaccharides) as a source of
carbohydrates, which are mainly located in secondary cell wall
layer. Some groups of them may also cause limited degradation of
lignin. In advanced states of decay, the cells lose rigidity but the
main structure of the wood is unchanged. Also, shrinkage of the
cells in the brown-rotted wood occurs and results in cracking into
cubical pieces. White-rot fungi may preferentially degrade lignin,
which is principally concentrated in the middle lamella region
(lignin-selective fungi) or some white-rot fungi may degrade all cell
wall components simultaneously. White-rot fungi are characterized by a great diversity of wood-decay types and all of them
produce a white color in the wood due to extensive lignin alteration
or removal from the cells. Soft-rot fungi are Ascomycetes that show
preference for cellulose and hemicellulose, but they do not appear
to degrade lignin within the middle lamella. Some soft-rot fungi
may erode the secondary wall completely while others produce
cavities within the secondary walls. The distinctive appearance of
these cavities is related to the cellulolytic microﬁbrillar orientation
that changes in different layers of cell walls (Blanchette et al., 1990;
Blanchette, 2000, 2003; Eriksson et al., 1990; Fengel and Weneger,
1983; Zabel and Morrell, 1992).
Among all groups of fungal-decayed wood, the most common
are the microbes responsible for white and brown rot, whereas the
soft-rot fungi usually appear in restricted environments of very wet
or dry conditions. In natural environments, two main groups
(white-rot or brown-rot fungi) dominate, but they are hardly
represented in ancient wood collections while soft rot dominates in
archaeological wood. This is consistent with the preservation of
wood over time since in favorable conditions a variety of microorganisms quickly decompose all kinds of organic matter. The
wooden material may be preserved in extremely dry or waterlogged conditions in which a limited group of microorganisms
thrive. These habitats favor soft-rot fungi and exclude mostly
white- and brown-rot competitors (Rayner and Boddy, 1988;
Blanchette, 2000, 2003). In archaeological charcoal, all of the
fungal groups may be found, although their presence is directly
related to the archaeological context. In the charcoal assemblages
that result from domestic fuelwood, white-rot and brown-rot fungi

2108

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

are prevalent in the deadwood gathered from the forest. These
microbes may also appear in the remains of burnt wooden
constructions, especially when the material was previously in
contact with the ground. It is less probable but not impossible to
ﬁnd soft-rot fungi in the charcoals, but their presence could be
limited depending on the environmental conditions.
Three major groups of wood-rot fungi may appear together in the
process of wood deterioration and may be accompanied by other
organisms such as bacteria and insects that may contribute to wood
deterioration processes. This presents additional difﬁculties when
trying to identify the cause of wood degradation. The nature of these
relationships presents very wide diversity from symbiosis to parasitic associations, and the major food sources may constitute the
wood itself as well as insect feeding on fungi in wood (i.e., mycophagous insects) (Blanchette et al., 1990; Blanchette, 2000, 2003;
Eriksson et al., 1990; Gilbertson, 1984; Harrington, 2005; Zabel and
Morrell, 1992). When studying deadwood that was gathered from
the forest ﬂoor, different organisms related to forest soil ecology
should be of special interest, and one group of microorganisms is
particularly worth mentioning: ﬁlamentous bacteria of Actinomycetales order. This group may deteriorate the wood components
and play an important role in the decomposition of organic matter in
the soil. Hyphae and spore chains that belong to this group are
present within the charcoals and may occasionally be incorrectly
identiﬁed as fungi. However, their hyphae may be generally distinguished from fungal hyphae on the basis of their smaller dimensions
(Eriksson et al., 1990; Kutzner, 1981; Lechevalier and Lechevalier,
1981; Rayner and Boddy, 1988).
Another problem with regard to the fungi found in the charcoals
is related to the possibility of observing the agents of post-burning
attacks. Charcoal is the most ubiquitous plant material found in
archaeological sites because of its lack of valuable nutrients after
burning for microbiological decomposers. There is a group of fungi
that grow on burnt areas and may be responsible for charcoal
degradation. They belong mainly to the class of Discomycetes of
the Ascomycotina subdivision but some may also represent
Basidiomycotina. All of the various names of these microorganisms,
such as anthracobionts, carbonicolous, pyrophilous, ﬁreplace fungi
or phoenicoid fungi, indicate their appearance after burning, in the
substrates rich in charcoal material. However, these fungi are not
specialized in charcoal decomposition and their preferred habitat is
related to the heat-treated soils that stimulate their germination.
Some of them may appear on the tree after partial burning and
the presence of injuries can favor the development of a new
community. Also, these unoccupied substrates provide great
opportunity for rapid colonization that excludes competition
(Alexopoulos et al., 1996; Carpenter and Trappe, 1985; Petersen,
1974; Rayner and Boddy, 1988).

Fomitopsis pinicola as the fungal species responsible for the wood
decay since the sample was taken directly behind a basidiocarp.
Fruiting bodies were not found on the other samples so the speciﬁc
fungus causing the attack was not known. However, anatomical
observations were made on these decayed wood samples to characterize the speciﬁc type of decay that was present.
3.2. Burning process
Small pieces of infected wood (3e5 cm) were burned at
temperatures between 300 and 350  C. Each sample was divided
into two parts for charcoal making; the ﬁrst sample was burned
wrapped in aluminum foil in order to reduce the oxygen supply
while the second one was burned with unlimited oxygen. Many
different factors such as ﬁre temperature, length of exposure,
location of the ﬁre, position of the wood in the ﬁre, diameter of
the wood, and humidity of the wood can inﬂuence the charcoaliﬁcation processes (Braadbaart and Poole, 2008; Panshin and de
Zeeuw, 1980; Smart and Hoffman, 1988; Théry-Parisot, 2001).
The design of representative burning experiments becomes
particularly difﬁcult when there is limited availability of historic
wood samples. Both the foil-wrapped and unwrapped samples are
designed to simulate charcoal making in an open-air ﬁreplace. The
ﬁrst group may represent the charcoal produced with partly
restricted oxygen supply, such as under other burnt wood and
ashes in the center of the ﬁre (Smart and Hoffman, 1988). The
second group may correspond to the wood and charcoal located in
the periphery of the ﬁre. The relatively low temperature is also
associated with the charring process, where the charcoal is
usually preserved when the temperature of the ﬁre goes below
350  C (Braadbaart and Poole, 2008). Again, the size and condition
of the wood has inﬂuence on the low temperature rate of
charring. Small and dried pieces of wood began to burn with
ﬂames shortly after reaching 280e300  C and their exterior
surfaces started converting quickly into ashes. For this reason,
wood beginning to convert to ash was sprayed with water in
order to stop the combustion.
3.3. Scanning electron microscopy sample preparation
Wood and charcoal fragments were ﬁrst examined using
a reﬂected light microscope and then pieces of three anatomical
sections were prepared: transverse (T.S.), longitudinal tangential
(L.T.S.), and longitudinal radial (L.R.S.). All fragments were manually
broken, and put on the aluminum stubs with adhesive tabs.
Samples were coated with gold/palladium and later examined
using scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi model S-3400N
VP-SEM; Hitachi model S-4100).

3. Material and methods

4. Results and discussion

3.1. Wood samples

4.1. Experimental results

Six wood samples that represent the major fungal degradation
groups were prepared for conversion to charcoal. The ﬁrst group
included two samples, a coniferous wood Tsuga sp. (Fig. 1) and
a hardwood (Populus sp.), infected with brown-rot. The second
group of hardwoods was infected with white-rot fungi and
included one sample from a deciduous oak (Quercus sp.; Fig. 2) and
two poplar samples (Populus sp.; Fig. 3). All of these woods were
collected from downed trees on the ground in a natural forest. The
last group consisted of pine wood from a prehistoric great house
dwelling in New Mexico (Blanchette et al., 2004) that had advanced
stages of soft-rot decay (Pinus sp.; Fig. 4). Moreover, in the case of
the brown-rot coniferous sample, it was possible to identify

Observations of wood and charcoal samples under the microscope show similarities in decay patterns, and hyphae were identiﬁed in both types of samples, the foil-wrapped and unwrapped
samples (Figs. 1e4).
4.1.1. Brown rot
In the coniferous wood sample attacked by brown-rot fungi, the
typical “wavy” appearance of degraded cells can be observed in the
T.S. of wood and charcoal samples (Fig. 1a and d). Fungal hyphae are
also present in both samples and are numerous in all anatomical
sections (Fig. 1aef). In the L.T.S. the hypha penetrates tracheids via
bordered pits and also enters a ray directly through the cell wall

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

2109

Fig. 1. Wood (aec) and charcoal (def) fragments with brown-rot fungi: Tsuga sp. Transverse section (a and d), longitudinal tangential section (b and e), longitudinal radial section (c
and f).

(Fig. 1b and e). The ﬁne structure of fungi is preserved in the
charcoal after burning and even calcium oxalate crystals that are
associated with the hyphae remain clearly visible (Fig. 1c and f).
These crystal structures may be related to hyphal metabolism
products and some fungi may produce different types of deposits
(Eriksson et al., 1990). Elemental analysis of these samples showed
the presence of mainly calcium and potassium. In the L.R.S., a more
deteriorated structure of the wood was seen in some areas of the
fragments. This is the result of an extensive removal of cell content,
producing holes in their walls, and is a result of consumption of the
polysaccharides together with lignin (Fig. 1c and f). Moreover, the
wood was infested by F. pinicola, a species that has been reported
as capable of causing lignin modiﬁcation (Eriksson et al., 1990,
p. 53). The comparison between two kinds of samples e burnt with
limited oxygen and open to the air e showed no differences in
preservation of microbes in the charcoal.
In hardwood samples (Populus sp.), the same pattern of wood
decay was observed since the loss of strength resulting from fungal
attack caused distortion of plant tissue and the presence of a thin

framework of ligniﬁed tissue. Also, fungal hyphae were well
preserved and were mainly observed within the vessels. Once
again, the same characteristics were observed in samples from both
types of charcoaliﬁcation processes.
4.1.2. White rot
Two examples of white-rot fungi that show different stages of
wood decay are presented. The ﬁrst one, (Quercus sp. deciduous,
Fig. 2) illustrates an exceptionally advanced stage of decay that
originated from simultaneous degradation of all cell wall
components. The infected wood was characterized by a spongy
appearance and showed an extensive growth of mycelia, which ﬁlled
most of the fragile and deteriorated oak tissues, as observed under
the reﬂected light microscope (also seen in SEM images Fig. 2aec).
After burning, both the charring and the carbonization processes left
all characteristic patterns of decay previously observed in the wood
(Fig. 2def). In the T.S. (Fig. 2d) and L.R.S. (Fig. 2f), earlywood vessels
were ﬁlled with fungal mycelium and fungal attacks were concentrated in the area of uniseriate and multiseriate rays that caused

2110

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

Fig. 2. Wood (aec) and charcoal (def) fragments with white-rot fungi: Quercus sp. deciduous. Transverse section (a and d), longitudinal tangential section (b and e), longitudinal
radial section (c and f).

erosion of the cell walls and large voids. Also in the L.T.S., the attack of
ray parenchyma was observed together with the degradation of all
cell wall components (Fig. 2e). Widespread fungal mycelia were also
seen in the L.R.S. that at lower magniﬁcation showed remnants of
wood structure (Fig. 2f).
In the second piece of wood (Populus sp.), the attack by whiterot fungi was less developed (Fig. 3). The charcoals showed
evidence of fungal preservation after charcoaliﬁcation, and the
image of the decayed wood was very comparable to that obtained
from the charcoal. The fungal hyphae were grouped mainly in the
vessels and their metabolic products, in the form of crystal oxalate
salts, were also observed (Fig. 3a, c, d, e, and f). White-rot fungi that
commonly decayed the sapwood of various angiosperms, such as
Odontia bicolor, commonly produce these calcium crystals in early
stages of decay. In the L.R.S., selective degradation of lignin was
observed in the region of ray-vessel intersections where the middle
lamella was not present (Fig. 3b and e), whereas in the L.T.S. lignin
removal resulted in separation of axial tissues (Fig. 3f). Also, the ray
parenchyma in the L.T.S. was more deteriorated and this suggesting

that these cells, which are rich in polysaccharides, were the ﬁrst
colonized. In some regions of the vessels, a simultaneous degradation was documented as hyphae eliminated all cell components
and produced holes around the pitting (Fig. 3b, e and f). Another
poplar wood sample attacked by white-rot fungi showed similarities regarding the preservation of fungal hyphae and the indication
of a wood-decay pattern of similar degradation type.
4.1.3. Soft rot
In the T.S. of coniferous wood and charcoal, the cavities
completely ﬁll the cell walls of tracheids leaving areas of middle
lamella untouched (Fig. 4a and d). The typical pattern of the cavities
was more evident in the longitudinal sections, especially in the
L.R.S. in which there were cavities of cell walls and around bordered
pits in diverse orientations (Fig. 4c and f). The ray parenchyma cells
were also colonized as was observed in both transverse and
longitudinal tangential sections (Fig. 4a, b, d and e). Furthermore,
after burning took place, fungal hyphae in all charcoal fragments
were preserved in the form of hyphal imprints and were present in

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

2111

Fig. 3. Wood (aec) and charcoal (def) fragments with white-rot fungi: Populus sp. Transverse section (a and d), longitudinal tangential section (b and e), longitudinal radial section
(c and f).

the cell lumen as individual hypha or as a mass of mycelia. Since,
this was from a sample of prehistoric wood, the hyphae present and
responsible for causing the decay may have been very old and only
residual imprints of the fungal cells remained in the wood before
burning.
The experiments have demonstrated the preservation of fungal
mycelium in test charcoals after the burning process. The fungi
were present in all anatomical wood sections, mainly as hyphae
that penetrated cell walls and formed accumulations of mycelia.
Apart from individual hyphae, many fungal imprints were also
observed. It was noticed that if hyphae colonized the cell lumen,
after burning they were preserved in the lumen (Figs. 1e4), and if
they were older collapsed hyphae, they occurred as imprints
(Fig. 3c and f). Therefore, the results suggested that hyphae are
preserved in the charcoal exactly as they appear in the wood before
charcoaliﬁcation. Consequently, it is possible to deduce prior attack
on the wood by the presence of fungi in both forms as hyphae and
as imprints. Furthermore, the way the hyphae occur within the

lumen is also signiﬁcant. Only the hyphae that appear attached
directly to the cell walls and emerge from behind the cell wall
surface should be taken into account as evidence for pre-burning
activities. It is not possible to identify the fungus producing the
decay by observing only the fungal hyphae since there are no
structural differences among most species or genera. At times
hypha can be accompanied by spores or calcium oxalate crystals
but many fungi classiﬁed as white- and brown-rot Basidiomycetes
can produce them.
In many cases the pattern of wood deterioration may help in the
characterization of the wood-decaying organisms. Observing the
macrostructure of the wood may help signiﬁcantly in determining
its decay type. In brown rot, the fungi cause the characteristic wavy
appearance due to the lack of strength, particularly visible in the
transverse section but also seen in longitudinal ones. The same
group is distinguished by forming cubical cracks in the wood. In
some advanced stages of decay, the cell walls begin to have
a porous aspect as polysaccharides are extensively removed. Some

2112

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

Fig. 4. Wood (aec) and charcoal (def) fragments with soft-rot fungi: Pinus sp. Transverse section (a and d), longitudinal tangential section (b and e), longitudinal radial section
(c and f).

of the brown-rot fungi also decompose some lignin that may result
in the destruction or an extremely fragile middle lamella that
appears degraded. This could mimic some stages of a white rot.
Soft-rot fungi are characterized by forming biconical and cylindrical
cavities in the secondary cell walls but some forms of soft rot such
as the erosion of the secondary wall can appear similar to early
stages of attack by a white-rot fungus (Blanchette et al., 1990;
Blanchette, 2000, 2003; Eriksson et al., 1990; Schwarze, 2007). As
a result, it is important to remember that some features characteristic for one rot group may also be characteristic of another
group. Moreover, wood can be a source of nutrition for different
groups of wood-rot fungi, and combination of attack such as
brown rot following a white rot or soft rot (Blanchette, 2003;
Eriksson et al., 1990; Rayner and Boddy, 1988). Therefore, identiﬁcation of microorganisms preserved in charcoal on the basis of
wood-decay patterns may be difﬁcult since features such as color of
the wood are not observable. Nonetheless, all the above-described
microscopic characteristics serve as tools for compiling general
information that may indicate possible uses of decayed wood.

In archaeological charcoal there may also be modern fungal
hyphae coming from plant roots or soils that frequently overgrow
the ancient material and use the structure of the charcoal as support.
Modern attack also can take place in the storage area after
excavation. This is especially true for charcoal samples after ﬂotation
methods or water sieving recovery techniques are employed, or if
the charcoals are kept together with uncharred roots or other plant
material that are not completely dried out. In these cases, anthracological analysis of the sample may also help distinguish between
possible pre-burning attack and modern infected samples. Some
microbial uncharred mycelia may exhibit characteristic colors
observable under the reﬂected light microscope. For example, the
surface of a few charcoals from the same sample from a Bronze Age
necropolis of Kokotów (Poland) was covered by fresh mycelia of
white color that under higher magniﬁcation showed violet and
green colors (Moskal-del Hoyo, unpublished data). Taking into
considerations the morphology of these microorganisms, it is
possible that they correspond to some ﬁlamentous bacteria of
Actinomycetales order and especially to the Streptomycetaceae

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

family (Kutzner, 1981). Streptomycetes are very ubiquitous but they
are most typical in the soil habitats where they act as decomposers
(Kutzner, 1981; Williams et al., 1984). They may also colonize and
degrade wood (Eriksson et al.,1990) but in the case of charcoals from
Kokotów, the colored mycelia may suggest their post-burning
activities. The growth of microbes on these charcoals might have
been favored by the recovery of the soil samples and their storage
under conditions that may have favored their growth. Finally, it can
be stated that modern fungal infestation most likely covers the
surface of charcoals and only fungi found inside freshly broken
charcoal fragments could be the result of pre-burning activities.
Nevertheless, the phenomenon of possible modern attack by
different agents requires more detailed studies.
4.2. Archaeological results
A few examples of archaeological charcoal that showed symptoms of pre-burning fungal attack were compared to the abovedescribed wood-decay patterns (Fig. 5). The ﬁrst charcoal came

2113

} ) that belonged to the
from an eastern Hungarian site (Nagyköru
early Neolithic Körös culture (Raczky et al., in press). This charcoal
of ivy (Hedera helix) in the T.S. showed insect attack in the form of
round axially situated holes within the plant tissue (Fig. 5a) that
were also ﬁlled with fungal hyphae; however, in this section the
ultrastructure of the wood did not present obvious fungal
degradation. On the other hand, in the L.R.S. some hyphae and
hyphal imprints occurred in the vessels (Fig. 5b). The attack caused
holes around the pitting that demonstrated their ability to degrade
all cell wall components. The attack was not at an advanced stage
and the wood-decay pattern was not very evident, nevertheless the
pre-burning microbial activity in the wood may be seen. This
charcoal fragment was found within an apparent disposal pit
together with other remnants of domestic fuelwood, burnt animal
bones, fragments or lithic material and pottery. In general, the
} is characterized by the prescharcoal assemblage from Nagyköru
ence of wood of small diameter that may correspond to branch
woods or twigs of different arboreal and bushy taxa (oak, elm, ivy,
plum, buckthorn), and the majority shows clear evidence of

Fig. 5. Archaeological charcoal samples with pre-burning microbial attack: a. Hedera helix, transverse section; b. Hedera helix, longitudinal radial section; c. Prunus sp., transverse
section; d. Prunus sp., longitudinal tangential section; eef. Pinus sylvestris, transverse section.

2114

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

microbial and insect attack (Moskal-del Hoyo, in press). This
settlement represents the group of northernmost sites of the ﬁrst
Neolithic cultures in Tisza River valley and in the proximity of the
site there are no traces of previous Mesolithic occupation detected
(Raczky et al., in press). As a consequence, this new site was located
in an area of unexploited woodland which shows an abundance of
different kinds of fuelwood. The large amount of dry wood is
expected at this site since it was a typical mature forest in which
deadwood forms an important part of the tree biomass (Rayner and
Boddy, 1988). Therefore, the management of wood resources at the
settlement corresponds to the ﬁrst situation in the “Principle of
Least Effort” model testiﬁed by Shackleton and Prins (1992). In this
case, the gathering of ﬁrewood corresponded to very little collection effort based on high availability of dry wood. Usually the
deadwood formed in the forest litter or attached to standing trees
requires prolonged periods of time and good ecological conditions
of humidity and temperature to be colonized by decomposers
(Rayner and Boddy, 1988) and have signiﬁcant micromorphological
changes present that are characteristic of decayed wood. It is
possible that the charcoal assemblage coming from Nagykörü, in
which a great quantity of attacked wood of small diameter is
detected, represents the model of easy collectable deadwood for
domestic ﬁres. Diversity of taxa that exhibit a pattern of decayed
wood may also conﬁrm this hypothesis and indicate the preference
for dead older wood found on the ground.
The second charcoal fragment (Fig. 5c and d) came from the late
Neolithic settlement of Polgár-CsTszhalom located in eastern
Hungary (Raczky and Anders, 2008). This fragment was very fragile
and was characterized by distortion of wood tissues, particularly
vessels and ﬁbers (Fig. 5c). The rays were also deteriorated, but it
was still possible to identify it as Prunus sp. In longitudinal sections,
all charcoal fragments were cracked into cubical pieces (Fig. 5d),
but this pattern was different from the cracks usually found in
charcoal as a result of a burning process (Carrión Marco, 2005;
Marguerie and Hunot, 2007; Théry-Parisot, 2001). All the features
of the Prunus fragment indicated that brown-rot fungi probably
degraded it. The Polgár-CsTszhalom site represents the northernmost tell settlement known from the Carpathian Basin which
together with another external horizontal settlement constitutes
an important complex center of the Upper Tisza River region,
extended along an area of 28 ha (Raczky and Anders, 2008). The
late Neolithic occupation of the site is divided into three main
phases that correspond to a duration of about 500 years (ca.
4940e4500 cal. BC: Raczky et al., 2007). The Prunus charcoal fragment described above was found together with the remnants of
other tree taxa (oak, elm and dogwood/cornelian cherry) within
sediments of one of the houses dated to the oldest phase of the tell.
The exact provenance of this charcoal sample (domestic ﬁrewood
versus construction elements) is not well deﬁned due to the
leveling of layers before the preparation of the subsequent
construction in the tell, thus the interpretation of the meaning of
the presence of decayed wood is not obvious. However, it is possible
that it was used previously as construction material and the
brown rot is decay that occurred in the structure. This type of
decay dominates in building wood (Rayner and Boddy, 1988,
pp. 453e460, Table 12.2). Moreover, it should be added that the
charcoal assemblage from different archaeological features located
in diverse contexts (refusal pits, ﬂoors of houses, hearths, ditches)
from other two recent phases constitutes a sample of wood used in
the settlement in the apogee of human occupation in the region
(Moskal-del Hoyo, unpublished data). In those phases, the woodland area should have manifested some changes following
systematic and continued gathering of wood for different purposes.
} site, it is probable that in the vicinity
In contrast with the Nagyköru
there was very little dry wood available and probably some fresh

wood was also regularly used. This condition may correspond to the
situation described by Shackleton and Prins (1992) as typical for
long-established occupation areas. Particularly in recent phases of
the Polgár-CsTszhalom tell in the charcoals there are almost no
signs of decayed wood. This may conﬁrm the progressive lack of dry
wood. Probably the deadwood still selected in the vicinity of the
site was gathered before the advanced development of a decay
community could expand. The only example of decayed wood was
observed in the context of houses, associated with ash and oak
charcoal. In this case, it likely represents remnants of some reused
timber used for construction as both of these woods were preferentially used for these purposes. The possibility of wood recycling
has been previously noted in archaeological sites and is known
from ethnographic examples (Asouti, 2005).
A third charcoal fragment was from the wood used in a funerary
pyre and came from the Bronze Age necropolis of Kokotów
(Kraków, Poland) (Matoga, unpublished; preliminary results:
Matoga et al., 2009). This fragment belonged to a small branch or
a young shoot of common pine (Pinus sylvestris) (Fig. 5e). At higher
magniﬁcation, the cell walls of the majority of tracheids were
eroded and cells had holes near the lumen surface (Fig. 5f). Hyphae
of various diameters were preserved in the wood structure. It is
probable that this wood was infested by a white-rot fungus that
simultaneously removed all cell wall components. Moreover, the
biodeterioration of the branch wood also conﬁrmed its source
among the litter, since this part of wood is typically more resistant
to microbial attack. This is especially true in gymnosperms, in
which compression wood is formed (Blanchette, 2000, 2003). The
charcoal analysis from the necropolis of Kokotów comprises more
than 100 graves (Moskal-del Hoyo, unpublished data; preliminary
results: Moskal-del Hoyo, 2008) in which 15 taxa and different
types of gathered wood were documented: trunks, branch woods,
twigs, barks, and conifer cones. Also the presence of many branch
woods that showed microbial deterioration may indicate that part
of the wood prepared for the rituals of cremation was obtained
from deadwood found in the forest. These observations together
with taxonomical analysis may demonstrate a special pattern of
wood selection for funerary purposes. In this case, the data suggest
a more opportunistic model of wood selection of funerary fuel,
which was probably motivated by the need for collection of a large
amount of wood that was generally required for cremation, as
shown by modern analogy (e.g. Sikandar et al., 1989).
Three examples presented above correspond to white-rot or
brown-rot fungi but on basis of the presence of hyphae or decay
patterns, the exact place in which the attack occurred cannot be
indicated as the same characteristics may represent considerable
number of diverse fungi. Moreover, the fungi that cause white or
brown rot play an important role in wood decomposition of
different habitats in the woodland. They invade the deadwood that
is accumulated in the forest ﬂoor but they also colonize dead
branches or twigs attached to standing trees. The same fungi also
decompose remains of dead standing trees. Some Basidiomycetes
that are mainly responsible for wood decomposition in the forest
have also developed different strategies to colonize a living tree.
This usually constitutes a very hostile habitat for fungi growth due
to its high content of water in the sapwood, unfavorable aeration
and formation of mechanical barriers and allelopathic chemicals.
Compared to the decomposers of deadwood, these organisms
represent a minor group of fungi. They mostly take advantages of
some disturbance produced to a tree (ﬁre scars, insect wounds,
mechanical injuries, etc.) which allow them to enter the heartwood, avoiding the barriers composed by the bark and sapwood,
but they may also behave as active pathogens. The action of fungi in
a living tree may be lethal but the plant may also recover depending
on the type of fungal attack and the degree of damage (Rayner and

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

Boddy, 1988; Schwarze et al., 2000). Furthermore, the same wooddecay pattern is also associated with fungi inhabiting wood outside
of woodland communities, in wood either utilized as timber and
raw material or stored (Rayner and Boddy, 1988). Even though the
exact habitat of decayed wood found in archaeological assemblages
cannot be stated, its presence indicates the selection of dry wood of
different origins, from the forest ﬂoor or above-ground parts of
trees and stored wood (Théry-Parisot, 2001, p. 50, Fig. 12). The
differences in deadwood and living trees attacked by fungi cannot
be easily discerned. However, in either case, their recovery may be
related to the selection of wood that is easier to collect compared to
the labor-intensive processing of wood from a healthy tree.
The presence of white-rot or brown-rot fungi in these three
archaeological sites is not unexpected since they are ubiquitous in
temperate regions. In general, the climatic zone should be taken
into consideration when trying to investigate the importance of
gathering of deadwood for domestic purposes. This is because in
temperate ecosystems the rate of wood decay is relatively high
compared to desert or tundra communities and is relatively slow
compared to a tropical rainforest (Rayner and Boddy, 1988). For
example, for a fallen tree in some temperate forests the microbial
colonization phase is about two years and it takes approximately 15
years for the advanced decomposition (Théry-Parisot, 2001, p. 39);
in tropical forests, a big tree can completely decompose in 10 years;
in sub-Alpine forests this process may take more than 70 years
(Rayner and Boddy, 1988, p. 308). Despite some general macroenvironmental trends, the wood-decay rate cannot be easily
determined since it is a dynamic and complex process. In the same
environment, characteristics such as wood diameter, exposure of
the surface or presence of bark and different microclimatic conditions inﬂuence and modify the processes of wood decay (Rayner
and Boddy, 1988). Therefore, the presence of pre-burning activities of fungi in wood coming from temperate regions might be
easier observed than in other zones. It is also important to
remember that deadwood does not necessarily represent decayed
wood. For example, in the Tucson area (Arizona, USA) the radiocarbon datings of deadwood recovered from the vicinity of the
archaeological sites demonstrated that due to the climatic conditions unfavorable for fungi growth (high temperature and low
moisture) linked with characteristics of local wood (dense and
hard), deadwood may be preserved for more than a millennium in
the environment (Schiffer, 1996, pp. 310e312). However, some
fungi, such as soft rot, do grow and degrade the wood (Blanchette
et al., 2004), and if that is the case, decay patterns even in this
location may help to identify the type of wood used as fuelwood.
The observation of fungi in charcoal assemblages as part of
anthracological analysis of archaeological charcoals may give
additional information concerning the models of wood management by past societies (Asouti and Austin, 2005; Théry-Parisot,
2001) and thus is related mostly to palaeoethnographic aspects of
wood usage. The aforementioned observations and case studies
(Théry-Parisot, 2001; Asouti, 2005) have demonstrated that the
presence or absence of wood attacked by fungi within a particular
charcoal assemblage should be interpreted individually as it
depends on different archaeological contexts which introduce many
variables of interpretation. First, a geographic situation of the site
(lowland, mountains, temperate zones, deserts, proximity of the
rivers, etc.) and climatic period (Interpleniglacial, maximum of Ice
Age, Atlantic period, Subatlantic period, etc.) indicate different
woodland communities (boreal forest, temperate broad-leaved
forest, temperate needle-leaved evergreen forest, riverine forests,
unexploited woodland, etc.). Second, a type of site (mobile huntergatherers campsite, seasonal site, settlement, long-term multiphase
site, industrial area, etc.) related to a type of activities concerning
the use of ﬁre (domestic, industrial or ritual hearths, funerary pyre,

2115

etc.) constitute a remarkable difference when interpreting charcoal
assemblages. Third, some taphonomic problems should also be
taken into account for the formulation of different hypotheses and
ﬁnally, the charcoal sampling strategies during archaeological
excavations may inﬂuence the results. It is important to emphasize
that the search for decayed wood should be integrated in the
charcoal analysis at the beginning of the study because the detection of fungi and their activities may require more detailed observations during the identiﬁcation (Asouti, 2005, p. 219). Finally, if the
charcoal assemblages that are characterized by the abundance of
decayed wood form the basis for further palaeoecological interpretation, it should be additionally analyzed according to its
ecological representativeness (Godwin and Tansley, 1941; ThéryParisot, 2001).
5. Conclusions
The biodeteriorated structure of wood and the fungi responsible
for its decay exhibit similar characteristics in both wood and
charcoal samples. Charcoal produced using a limited or unlimited
oxygen supply seems to have little inﬂuence on the preservation of
fungi because in both kinds of samples hyphae were documented
as individual hypha, mass of mycelia or as hyphal imprints. The
patterns of decayed wood attacked by the three major wood-rot
groups may be a valuable source of information when conducting
an anthracological analysis since the preservation of altered wood
structure is found in the macrostructure of archaeological charcoals
as well as the ultrastructure of the wood. Archaeological charcoal
shows evidence of microbial/insect presence and one of the main
problems is to determine the initial moment of their attack and
whether the attack occurred before or after burning. The results
presented here show the possibility of recognizing pre-burning
microbial activity because of the preservation of both fungal
hyphae and wood deteriorated structures after burning. Although
the identiﬁcation of the fungal agent is often possible by examining
the type of decay present, difﬁculties can be encountered if mixed
decayed patterns occur.
The recognition of the decayed wood in the archaeological
charcoal assemblage as part of the anthracological analysis may be
a source of relevant palaeoethnographic information but there is an
archaeological context at each site that indicates the possibility of
further models of interpretation.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. R.J.
Koestler and Dr. P. DePriest from the Smithsonian Museum
Conservation Institute and Prof. Dr. E. Badal from the University of
Valencia for their valuable comments. We would like to thank Prof.
Dr. P. Raczky, Dr. A. Anders (Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest),
A. Matoga (Archaeological Museum, Kraków), and the Kraków
Archaeological Team for Excavation of the Motorways for providing
archaeological charcoals. Special thanks to J. Watson (MCI) and the
personnel of SEM Laboratory (University of Valencia) for their help.
M. Moskal-del Hoyo would also like to thank the University of
Valencia (program “V Segles”) for the ﬁnancial support provided
while conducting research at the Smithsonian's Museum Conservation Institute.
References
Alexopoulos, C.J., Mims, C.W., Blackwell, M., 1996. Introductory Mycology. Wiley,
New York.
Asouti, E., 2005. Woodland vegetation and the exploitation of fuel and timber at
Neolithic Çatalhöyük: report on the woodecharcoal macro-remains. In:
Hodder, I. (Ed.), Inhabiting Çatalhöyük. Reports from the 1995e1999 Seasons.

2116

M. Moskal-del Hoyo et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2106e2116

Çatalhöyük Research Project 4, McDonald Institute Monograph. McDonald
Institute for Archaeological Research and British Institute of Archaeological at
Ankara, Cambridge, pp. 213e258.
Asouti, E., Austin, P., 2005. Reconstructing woodland vegetation and its exploitation
by past societies, base on the analysis and interpretation of archaeological wood
charcoal macro-remains. Environmental Archaeology 10, 1e18.
Badal García, E., 1992. L'anthracologie préhistorique: à propos de certains problèmes méthodologiques. Bulletin de la Société Botanique de France. Actualités
Botaniques 139 (2/3/4), 167e189.
Badal, E., 2004. Análisis antracológico de los restos del fuego doméstico del abrigo
de los Baños (Ariño, Teruel). In: Utrilla, P., Rodanés, J.M. (Eds.), Un asentamiento
epipaleolítico en el valle del Río Martín. El Abrigo de los Baños (Ariño, Teruel).
Monografías Arqueológicas 39. Universidad de Zaragoza, pp. 63e74.
Balows, A., Trüper, H.G., Dworkin, M., Harder, W., Schleifer, K.-H. (Eds.), 1992, The
Prokaryotes: a Handbook on the Biology of Bacteria: Ecophysiology, Isolation,
Identiﬁcation, Applications, vol. 1e4. Springer-Verlag, New York,.
Blanchette, R.A., 2000. A review of microbial deterioration in archaeological wood
from different environments. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 46, 189e204.
Blanchette, R.A., 2003. Deterioration in historic and archaeological woods from
terrestrial sites. In: Koestler, R.J., Koestler, V.R., Charola, A.E., NietoFernandez, F.E. (Eds.), Art, Biology and Conservation: Biodeterioration of Works
of Art. Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, pp. 328e347.
Blanchette, R.A., Held, B.W., Jurgens, J.A., Haight, J.E., 2004. Wood deterioration in
Chacoan great houses of the southwestern United States. Conservation and
Management of Archaeological Sites 6, 204e212.
Blanchette, R.A., Nilsson, T., Daniel, G., Abad, A., 1990. Biological degradation of wood.
In: Rowell, R.M., Barbour, J. (Eds.), Archaeological Wood: Properties, Chemistry,
and Preservation. American Chemical Society, Washington, pp. 141e174.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., 2008. Morphological, chemical and physical changes during
charcoaliﬁcation of wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts. Journal
of Archaeological Science 35, 2434e2445.
Caneva, G., Nugari, M.P., Salvadori, O., 2008. Plant Biology for Cultural Heritage:
Biodeterioration and Conservation. The Getty Conservation Institute, Los
Angeles, CA.
Carpenter, S.E., Trappe, J.M., 1985. Phoenicoid fungi: a proposed term for fungi that
fruit after heat treatment of substrate. Mycotaxon 23, 203e206.
Carrión Marco, Y., 2005. La vegetación mediterránea y atlántica de la Península
Ibérica. Nuevas secuencias antracológicas, S.I.P. In: Serie de Trabajos Varios, 104.
Diputación Provincial de Valencia, Valencia.
Chabal, L., 1997. Forêts et sociétés en Languedos (Néolithic ﬁnal, Antiquité tardive).
L'anthracologie, méthode et paléoécologie. In: Documents d’Archéologie
Française, 63. Ed. de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris.
Chabal, L., Fabre, L., Terral, J.-F., Théry-Parisot, I., 1999. L'Anthracologie. In:
Ferdière, A., Bourquin-Mignot, Ch., Brochier, J.-E., Chabal, L., Crozat, S., Fabre, L.,
Terral, J.-F., Théry-Parisot, I. (Eds.), La Botanique. Collection “Archéologiques”.
Ed. Errance, Paris, pp. 43e104.
Eriksson, K.-E.L., Blanchette, R.A., Ander, A., 1990. Microbial and Enzymatic Degradation of Wood and Wood Components. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Fengel, D., Weneger, G., 1983. Wood: Chemistry, Ultrastructure, Reactions. W. de
Gruyter, Berlin.
Figueiral, I., Mosbrugger, V., 2000. A review of charcoal analysis as a tool for
assessing Quaternary and Tertiary environments: achievements and limits.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 164, 397e407.
Gilbertson, R.L.,1984. Relationship between insects and wood-rotting basidiomycetes.
In: Wheeler, Q., Blackwell, M. (Eds.), FunguseInsects Relationships: Perspective in
Ecology and Evolution. Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 130e165.
Godwin, H., Tansley, A.G., 1941. Prehistoric charcoals as evidence of former vegetation, soil and climate. Journal of Ecology 29, 117e126.
Heinz, C., Thièbault, S., 1998. Characterization and palaeoecological signiﬁcance of
archaeological assemblages during Late and Post-Glacial phases in Southern
France. Quaternary Research 50, 56e68.
Heiss, A.G., Oeggl, K., 2008. Analysis of the fuel wood used in Late Bronze Age and
Early Iron Age copper mining sites of Schwaz and Brixlegg area. Vegetation
History and Archaeobotany 17 (2), 211e221.
Harrington, T.C., 2005. Ecology and evolution of mycophagous. In: Vega, F.E.,
Blackwell, M. (Eds.), InsecteFungal Associations: Ecology and Evolution. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 257e291.
Koestler, R.J., Koestler, V.R., Charola, A.E., Nieto-Fernandez, F.E. (Eds.), 2003. Art,
Biology and Conservation: Biodeterioration of Works of Art. Metropolitan
Museum of Art, New York.
Kutzner, H.J., 1981. The family Streptomycetaceae. In: Starr, M.P., Stolp, H.,
Trüper, H.G., Balows, A., Schelegel, H.G. (Eds.), The Prokaryotes: a Handbook on
Habitats, Isolation and Identiﬁcation of Bacteria, vol. II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,,
pp. 2027e2090.
Lechevalier, H.A., Lechevalier, M.P., 1981. Introduction to the order Actinomycetes.
In: Starr, M.P., Stolp, H., Trüper, H.G., Balows, A., Schelegel, H.G. (Eds.), The

Prokaryotes: a Handbook on Habitats, Isolation and Identiﬁcation of Bacteria,
vol. II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 1915e1922.
 ska-Zaja˛ c, M., Wasylikowa, K., 2005. Przewodnik do badan
 archeLityn
.
obotanicznych. Vademecum Geobotanicum, Sorus, Poznan
Marguerie, D., Hunot, J.-Y., 2007. Charcoal analysis and dendrology: data from
archaeological sites in north-western France. Journal of Archaeological Science
34, 1417e1433.

Matoga, A., Zubrzycki, Z., Zysnarska, M., 2009. Wste˛ pne wyniki ratowniczych badan
wykopaliskowych, przeprowadzonych w latach 2005e2007 na stanowisku 19
w Kokotowie, gm. Wieliczka. Archaeological Museum of Cracow (Poland),
Kraków. http://www.ma.krakow.pl/badania_terenowe/kokotow (last visited
22.01.10.).
Moskal-del Hoyo, M., 2008. Anthracological analysis from a Bronze Age necropolis
at Kokotów (Poland). In: 4th International Meeting of Anthracology, 8e13
September 2008, Brussels.
Moskal-del Hoyo, M. Wood charcoal remains from Early Neolithic Settlement at
} (Eastern Hungry). In: Koz1owski, J.K., Raczky, P. (Eds.), Neolithization
Nagyköru
of the Carpathian Basin: Northernmost Distribution of the Starcevo-Körös
Culture. The Polish Academy of Arts and Science, Kraków. Eötvös Loránd
University, Institute of Archaeological Science, Budapest. Kraków, in press.
Ntinou, M., 2002. La Paleovegetación en el Norte de Grecia desde el Tardiglaciar
hasta el Atlántico. Formaciones Vegetales, Recursos y Usos. BAR IS, 1083.
Oxford.
Panshin, A.J., de Zeeuw, C., 1980. Textbook of Wood Technology: Structure, Identiﬁcation, Properties, and Uses of the Commercial Woods of the United States and
Canada. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Petersen, P.M., 1974. Fireplace fungi in an arctic area: middle west Greenland. Friesia
10, 270e280.
Raczky, P., Domboróczki, L., Hajdú, Z., 2007. The site of Polgár-CsTszhalom and its
cultural and chronological connections with the Lengyel culture. Eötvös Loránd
University, Institute of Archaeological Science, Budapest. Kraków. In:
Koz1owski, J.K., Raczky, P. (Eds.), The Lengyel, Polgár and Related Cultures in the
Middle/Late Neolithic in Central Europe. The Polish Academy of Arts and
Science, Kraków, pp. 49e70.
Raczky, P., Anders, A., 2008. Late Neolithic spatial differentiation at PolgárCsTszhalom, eastern Hungary. In: Bailey, D.W., Whittle, A., Hoffman, D. (Eds.),
Living Well Together? Settlement and Materiality in the Neolithic of South-East
and Central Europe. Oxbow Books, pp. 35e53.
Raczky, P., Sümegi, P., Bartosiewicz, L., Gál, E., Kaczanowska, M., Koz1owski, J.K.,
Anders, A. Ecological barrier versus Mental Marginal Zone? Problems of the
northernmost Körös culture settlements in the Great Hungarian Plain.
Römisch-Germanishes Zentralmuseum Tagungen, vol. 2, in press.
Rayner, A.D.M., Boddy, L., 1988. Fungal Decomposition of Wood: Its Biology and
Ecology. Wiley, New York.
Salisbury, E.J., Jane, F.W., 1940. Charcoals from Maiden Castle and their signiﬁcance
in relation to the vegetation and climatic conditions in prehistoric times.
Journal of Ecology 28, 310e325.
Schiffer, M.B., 1996. Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record, second ed.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Schwarze, F.W.M.R., 2007. Wood decay under the microscope. Fungal Biology
Reviews 21, 133e170.
Schwarze, F.W.M.R., Engels, J., Mattheck, C., 2000. Fungal Strategies of Wood Decay
in Trees. Springer, Berlin.
Schweingruber, F.H., 1982. Mikroskopische Holzanatomie, Komisionverslag. In: F.
Flück-Wirth (Ed.), Internationale Buchhandlung für Botanik und Naturwissenschaften, CH-9053 Teufen AR.
Scott, A.C., Cripps, J.C., Collinson, M.E., Nichols, G.J., 2000. The taphonomy of charcoal following a recent heathland ﬁre and some implications for the interpretation of fossil charcoal deposits. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 164, 1e31.
Shackleton, C.M., Prins, F., 1992. Charcoal analysis and the “Principle of Least
Effort” e a conceptual model. Journal of Archaeological Science 19, 631e637.
Sikandar, M., Tripathi, B.D., Shukla, S.C., 1989. Possible ecological effects of dead
body cremation on the bank of river Ganga at Varanasi. Journal of Tropical
Ecology 30, 90e95.
Smart, T.L., Hoffman, E.S., 1988. Environmental interpretation of archaeological
charcoal. In: Hastorf, Ch.A., Popper, V.S. (Eds.), Current Palaeoethnobotany.
Analytical Methods and Cultural Interpretations of Archaeological Plant
Remains. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 167e205.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2001. Économie du combustible au Paléolithique. Anthracologie,
Expérimentation, Taphonomie. In: Dossier de Documentation Archéologique,
20. C.N.R.S., Paris.
Williams, S.T., Lanning, S., Wellington, E.M.H., 1984. Ecology of Actinomycetes. In:
Goodfellow, M., Mordawski, M., Williams, S.T. (Eds.), The Biology of the Actinomycetes. Academic Press, London, pp. 481e528.
Zabel, R.A., Morrell, J.J., 1992. Wood Microbiology: Decay and Its Prevention.
Academic Press, San Diego.

