Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Human Evolution
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhevol

Site formation processes at Pinnacle Point Cave 13B (Mossel Bay, Western Cape
Province, South Africa): resolving stratigraphic and depositional complexities
with micromorphologyq
Panagiotis Karkanas a, *, Paul Goldberg b, c
a

Ephoreia of Palaeoanthropology-Speleology of Southern Greece, Ardittou 34b, 11636 Athens, Greece
Department of Archaeology, Boston University, 675 Commonwealth Ave. Boston, MA 02215, USA
Zentrums Für Naturwissenschaftliche Archäologie, Institut für Ur- und Frühgeschichte und Archäologie des Mittelalters, Abteilung Ältere Urgeschichte und Quartärökologie,
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Germany
b
c

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 12 August 2008
Accepted 2 February 2009

Site PP13B is a cave located on the steep cliffs of Pinnacle Point near Mossel Bay in Western Cape
Province, South Africa. The depositional sequence of the cave, predating Marine Isotopic Stage 11 (MIS
11) and continuing to present, is in the form of isolated sediment exposures with different depositional
facies and vertical and lateral variations. Micromorphological analysis demonstrated that a suite of
natural sedimentation processes operated during the development of the sequence ranging from water
action to aeolian activity, and from speleothem formations to plant colonization and root encrustation. At
the same time, anthropogenic sediments that are mainly in the form of burnt remains from combustion
features (e.g., wood ash, charcoal, and burnt bone) were accumulating. Several erosional episodes have
resulted in a complicated stratigraphy, as discerned from different depositional and post-depositional
features. The cave is associated with a ﬂuctuating coastal environment, frequent changes in sea level and
climate controlled patterns of sedimentation, and the presence or absence of humans.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Cave sediment
Combustion features
Diagenesis
Micromorphology
Site formation

Introduction
Description of cave
The overall stratigraphy of PP13B is discussed in Marean et al.
(2010). From these descriptions it is obvious that there are isolated sediment exposures with different depositional facies and
vertical and lateral variations (Fig. 1). The cave has only a few
remnants of deposits, which mainly adhere to the side walls and
rear of the cave, or occur in topographic bedrock irregularities in
the ﬂoor. In several areas, physical connection between the
different exposures is not obvious, and although different areas of
the cave were excavated, it was not possible to connect all excavated areas because of time-consuming and methodical excavation
techniques and permit requirements. Therefore, reconstruction of
the sedimentary evolution of the cave is a difﬁcult task. The study of
site formation processes in PP13B is important for understanding
not only the nature of the anthropogenic sediment, but also the
q This article is part of ‘The Middle Stone Age at Pinnacle Point Site 13B, a Coastal
Cave near Mossel Bay (Western Cape Province, South Africa)' Special Issue.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pkarkanas@hua.gr (P. Karkanas).
0047-2484/$ e see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2010.07.001

relationship between the different anthropogenic inputs and the
natural processes that eroded, sealed, or interrupted the accumulation of archaeological remains. In addition, it will be shown that
a suite of natural sedimentation processes were operating during
the evolution of the sequence ranging from water action to aeolian
activity and from speleothem formations to plant colonization and
root encrustation. As these processes are attributed to changing
climatic and environmental conditions and sea level oscillations,
they can be used to help identify the presence or absence of human
occupation in the cave.
In this paper the study of the sediment is based on micromorphological analysis, supplemented by some instrumental mineralogical identiﬁcation. Brief ﬁeld descriptions provide a framework
for the ﬁner scale observations.
The site
PP13B is a cave located on the steep coastal cliffs of Pinnacle
Point near Mossel Bay. The shape of the cave is that of a ﬂattened
funnel. The height at the entrance is ca. 15 m above present sea
level and 23 m at the rear. The entrance opening is about 8 m wide.
The cave formed inside the Table Mountain Sandstone (TMS),
which in the area of the cave is a strained and recrystallized mica

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

257

Figure 1. Map of cave showing location of exposures and areas discussed in the text.

and feldspar quartzite. Brittleeductile shear zones transect the TMS
and most of the caves of the area are developed along this zone,
facilitated also by the presence of a dense fracture system. The
process of formation of the cave is mainly mechanical and involves
grain-by-grain removal by water ﬂowing with high energy, since in
quartzite dissolution is restricted to crystal contacts (Martini,
2000). Differential erosion along the shear zones, which act as
planes of weakness, must be the result of prolonged high sea
stands, since a series of caves all formed at the same height. The
shape of PP13B is reminiscent of a deep sea notch with a recumbent
V-shaped form (Fig. 2). In sea notches, the segment at the back with
maximum convexity usually corresponds to the neap tide range
(Pirazzoli, 1986). At PP13B Cave this range is estimated to be
20e22 m.
On the basis of the literature available from Africa and elsewhere,
such a high sea level in the tectonically stable area of South Africa is
thought to have occurred during Marine Isotopic Stage 11 (MIS 11,
ca. 400e430 ka) or earlier (Shackleton, 1987; Hearty et al., 1999;
Roberts et al., 2007). Future dating attempts at Pinnacle Point may
resolve this issue further. It is likely that more than one high sea
level was responsible for producing such a large cave in the hard,
nondissolving quartzite. So even if high sea level during MIS 11 is
not responsible for the formation of the cave, such a stand might
have played a role in its ﬁnal conﬁguration or in the development of
some of the sedimentary formations inside the cave (see below).
The height of the cliffs at Pinnacle Point is ca. 60 m. On top of the
cliffs an abrasion platform has developed likely attributable to
a Pliocene high sea level (Hendey, 1983; Haq et al., 1987). The
platform is covered by 1e2 m thick calcrete (calcareous soil) with
a laminar indurated cap (cf. Wright and Tucker, 1991) formed on
aeolian sand. Remnants of red sandy paleosols are located between
the modern top soil and an extensive loose aeolian sand cover. The
intensively fractured TMS facilitates percolation of water, which
upon dissolving the calcrete, becomes saturated with calcite that
precipitates speleothems inside the caves.

Methods
Micromorphology is the study of undisturbed sediments and
soils in thin section (Courty et al., 1989). As it studies intact
deposits, the original integrity of the materials is conserved, thus
allowing for the observation of depositional and post-depositional
features of natural or human origins.
The aim of the analysis was to document the site formation
processes operating at PP13B. Field observations alone clearly
indicated that anthropogenic accumulations (combustion features
and their remnants) were present, along with travertine/ﬂowstone.

Figure 2. Longitudinal proﬁle of cave. Note its recumbent V-shaped form attributed to
a former sea high stand. At the back of the cave clastic sediment conceals the bedrock
outline.

258

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Furthermore, aeolian inputs from the outside were also evident in
the form of the overall sandy nature of the deposits, as well as
remnants of aeolianite on the cave walls. Thus, micromorphological
analysis was employed to detail the timing and modiﬁcations of
these accumulations.
We collected samples from all exposures in the cave including
both excavation proﬁles and natural exposures (e.g., south wall of
cave). Sediments from outside the cave environment (e.g., calcrete
on plateau, modern tidal ﬂats) were also sampled. Micromorphological samples were collected as intact blocks using different
techniques depending on the consistency and degree of induration
of the sediment. For ﬁrm material, particularly that from the north
and south sections where Lightly Cemented-Middle Stone Age
(LC-MSA) deposits occurred, blocks were cut out of the proﬁle using
an angle grinder after being jacketed on the outside with plaster of
Paris. For loose and friable samples, such as those in the western
section at the rear of the cave, and in the central area near the
entrance, blocks were cut with a sharp tool and plaster jackets were
used to secure them as undisturbed samples. All samples were
wrapped securely with tissue paper and packaging tape.
Most sample preparation occurred at the Mossel Bay Archaeology Project (MAP) ﬁeld laboratory so as to minimize the potential
of sample disturbance during shipping. The samples were oven
dried for several days at 60  C and then impregnated with unpromoted polyester resin diluted with styrene at a ratio of seven parts
resin to three parts styrene; MEKP was the catalyst. After the resin
had achieved a hardened gel-like consistency, they were placed in
the oven at 60  C overnight for ﬁnal curing. The hardened blocks
were then cut into 1 cm thick slabs, transported back to the United
States, and processed into 50  75 mm petrographic thin sections
by Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA) or Quality Thin
Sections (Tucson, AZ). In total, 82 thin sections from PP13B were
observed in plane-polarized and cross-polarized light (PPL, and
XPL, respectively) at magniﬁcations ranging from 15 to 400.
Descriptive terminology of thin sections follows that of Bullock
et al. (1985; modiﬁed by Stoops, 2003) and Courty et al. (1989).
The mineralogy of selective bulk samples obtained from the
same features that were included in the micromorphological
samples was analyzed with Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) in an attempt to decipher the mineralogical features

identiﬁed in the thin sections. In total, 78 samples were analyzed
with FTIR at the Micromorphology Laboratory, Department of
Archaeology, Boston University.
Stratigraphy and sedimentology
The stratigraphic sequence at PP13B is revealed in two principal
ways, either in excavated sections or in natural exposures. In the
rear of the cave (Fig. 1) excavated sections are visible. Just inside the
front entrance of the cave, on the other hand, both natural and
excavated exposures occur. Natural exposures revealed only the LCMSA along the north and south walls of the cave, whereas both
cemented and softer sediments were exposed in the excavated
central part of the cave (sq. N91-93; E106-110; see Marean et al.
[2010] for complete stratigraphic descriptions).
Rear/Western area
Field observations Our stratigraphic division of the sequence is
slightly different from those of the excavators. We have tried to take
into consideration only major changes in the depositional style, as
well as major unconformities that would imply erosional phases or
long hiatuses. Archaeologists typically include changes in artifactual/ecofactual deposition in their stratigraphic divisions, as was
done at PP13B. We put in parentheses the corresponding stratigraphic units as given in Marean et al. (2010).
In the rear of the cave, excavations revealed the earliest deposits
in the cave sequence. These consist of boulder-rich beach deposits
at the base, overlain by a sequence of silty and sandy sediments
with intercalated organic bands that reveal local gullying and
erosional features, along with exposed surfaces. The deposits are
geogenic at the base and become increasingly anthropogenic
upward (Fig. 3).
The stratigraphically lowermost deposits consist of large
rounded boulders at the base of the sediments (called Laminated
Facies) exposed in N97E97 northwest, southwest, and southeast.
The interstitial ﬁner sediment consists of silty sand that occurred as
a thin rind on the rocks. Some of the large open spaces around the
rocks were partially ﬁlled with some roof spall. The deposits mostly
contained no artifacts.

Figure 3. (a) Finely bedded silts and sands in west face of square N97/E97 that overlie the basal beach boulders. The sampling column is visible at the left. (b) Photograph of
stratigraphic sequence in Square N98/E97 in rear of cave looking west. Numbers in the photo match those of the stratigraphic descriptions in the text.

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Deposits above the boulders are largely ﬁner grained and are
well exposed in squares N97, 98, E96, 97. They are as follows, from
bottom to top:
Unit 1 (Laminated Facies): This unit occurs throughout the
western area and directly overlies the boulder beach deposits
(Fig. 3). This is a predominantly sterile zone consisting of yellowish
gray to gray laminated sands and silt that become less well bedded
upward; this upper part also contains scatters of angular quartzite
fragments. Furthermore it contains yellow phosphatic (apatite)
lumps and stringers, as well as small pieces of fossil mammal bone
that exhibit polished surfaces. The contact with the overlying unit is
sharp and dips to the southeast. In the southern part of this western
proﬁle in square N97E97, the unit appears to interﬁnger with
overlying looser, angular debris of Unit 2 that ﬁlls a gully and ends
against the wall.
Unit 2 (LB Silt through to LBG Sand 3 and 2 and DB Sand 4a, b, c):
This ca. 15e20 cm thick unit ﬁlls a gully in the area of N97.5E97
(called LB Silt-G), but then extends throughout the excavated area.
Within the unit are several ca. 1 cm thick attenuated and inclined
organic dark stringers (DB Sand 4a, b, c) that thicken and thin, and
locally pinch out across the proﬁle (Fig. 3b); they are more
continuous along the northern face of N97E 96, 97. Unit 2 consists
of a jumbled, heterogeneous mixture of angular stones (bladed and
equant shapes) in a brownish sandy and silty matrix, which
becomes laminated and yellowish green near the bottom of the
unit. Also occurring within the unit are thin attenuated, 1 mm thick,
brownish stringers of apatite, as well as dark brown organic
anthropogenic horizons.
Unit 3 (LBG Sand 1): A ﬁrm, light grayish brown, homogeneous
massive silty sand with some quartzitic rock fragments and lumps
of apatite and some bone rests on a dark organic layer (DB Sand 4a).
Overall, the unit slopes to the southeast. To the southwest Unit 3 is
more heterogeneous and 1 cm size burrows increase; in the north
proﬁle, the unit is more uniform and less disturbed. It is ca. 20 cm
thick in the west proﬁle and about 12e15 cm thick in the north
proﬁle.
Unit 4 (DB Sand 3 and 2): About 10e15 cm thick, Unit 4 is
a crudely bedded, dark brown, organic, sandy gritty pebbly layer
with ﬁne platy granules and roof spall, which seems to represent
a change in the type of sedimentation, from silty to more ﬂat-stony
deposition. Locally the basal part is similar to Unit 3 but darker,
sandier, and less disturbed. Many rounded 1 cm size yellow lumps
of apatite and some bird gastroliths were recorded. Unit 4 has
a gradual boundary with the underlying Unit 3, but it is truncated
by the overlying Unit 5, although locally Unit 4 grades upward into
Unit 5. Unit 4 also dips to the southeast and sharply truncates
underlying deposits in a second gully.
Unit 5 (Surface Sediments): This 5 cm thick unit consists of ﬁne
angular roof spall in a loose, yellow, sandy matrix that thickens to
the west.
Micromorphology The ﬁeld descriptions were supplemented
with micromorphological observations. We provide both the
micromorphological sample numbers (in the form of MB-DateNumber) and the corresponding MAP sample numbers. Since
samples were studied by different researchers, the MAP sample
number acts as the common correlating identiﬁer.
Unit 1 (Laminated Facies; samples MB-03-1/2/3B/11, MB-03-45E;
20200/ 20206/ 20217B/ 20241/46563E, respectively): The basal
laminated sand and silt deposits of Unit 1 consist of rounded to
subangular grains of quartz (some of them having undulose
extinction; Fig. 4aed) with some minor quantity of feldspars, which
are partly altered to sericite. Grains occurring in trace amounts
include phytoliths, weathered diatoms, and isotropic, hollow, needle-like objects (sponge spicules). The ﬁne silty-clay is pale greenish
gray and almost isotropic phosphate (apatite). The silty and sandy

259

lenses contain apatite (conﬁrmed by Fourier Transform Infrared
spectroscopy, FTIR) mostly in the form of fragments of yellowish
isotropic masses that frequently contain bone fragments (Fig. 4e and
f); scattered yellowish bone fragments and solid yellow grains were
also observed, probably belonging to the remains of disintegrated
carnivore coprolites (e.g., Horwitz and Goldberg, 1989). Furthermore, the apatite clasts conform to the wavy form of the sandy and
silty matrix (Fig. 4a and b), and in certain cases, the apatite appears to
be precipitated within the silty clastic material; apatite authigenic
nodules were observed in sample MB-03-11A (20241A).
Although the coarse material (i.e., sand) is embedded in silt, the
silt rarely constitutes distinct lenses. In these latter cases there is no
grading of coarse to ﬁner material and the boundaries of the silt and
sand increments are rather sharp.
Overall, the wavy and bedded structure of the silt/sand, the
general paucity of silt lenses, and the washed (i.e., ﬁne-depleted/
elutriated) aspect of some of the coarse beds are clearly due to low
energy water ﬂow. Such conditions might occur with a spring seep
or surge emanating from the back of the cave, to the west of this
location (N97E97). The angular sand and silt are mostly breakdown
products of the bedrock rather than the result of inputs of aeolian or
marine sand, which are distinctly better rounded and calcareous
(see also below). On the other hand, trace amounts of rounded sand
(<1%) do occur and they become more distinctive as a whole within
the rear proﬁle.
The distinctiveness of the bedding in the lower part of Unit 1
suggests that the substrate was rather moist as the silts and sands
accumulated. However, the less distinct bedding in the upper part
of Unit 1 (Fig. 3a) may be indicative of drier conditions. Dry silt and
sand is not very cohesive and may have been reworked by the wind.
The thin lenses of amorphous apatite containing bone likely
represent bird and possibly bat guano. This material seems to have
accumulated during short periods when the silty and sandy
substrate was exposed as an ephemeral surface. The guano was
slightly dispersed by water ﬂowing across the surface.
Unit 2 (LB Silt through to LBG Sand 3 and 2 and DB Sand 4a, b, c;
samples MB-03-3A, MB-04-45D, C, B; 20217A/46563D, C, B,
respectively): Unit 2 has a sharp lower boundary and consists of
poorly sorted silty sand containing some roof spall (Fig. 5a and b).
Apatite occurs as yellow nodules and crust-like pieces (coprolite
fragments?) similar to what was observed in Unit 1. It also occurs as
isotropic colorless material that surrounds clastic grains. DB Sand
4a is a stringer of charcoal and burnt bone and marks one of the ﬁrst
occupations observed in the rear part of the cave, although
evidence of anthropogenic inputs were clearly found during excavation in the other underlying layers of Unit 2.
The erosional contact between the LB Silt and underlying
Laminated Facies that slopes to the southeast clearly shows that Unit 2
ﬁlls a gully that is incised into Unit 1, an erosional feature caused by
subsidence of the deposits. Moreover, the attenuated and discontinuous nature of the organic stringers shows that this sediment must
have also gradually slumped along the direction of the gully.
Furthermore, the sediment must have been at least seasonally wet in
order to maintain the cohesion of the observed bedding and stringers.
The slightly distorted nature of the sediment and its poor sorting
would corroborate this interpretation. Nevertheless, toward the top
of the unit, we see evidence for periods of stability in which organic
matter accumulated on exposed surfaces and was oxidized (Fig. 5b
and d). As the gully ﬁlled, however, phosphatic guano accumulated
and was incorporated and reworked into the gully deposits. The
presence of vertically oriented apatitic crusts and pieces of guano is
evidence for reworking of these materials.
Unit 3 (LBG Sand 1; sample MB-04-45B, A; MB-04-44E, D, C, B;
46563B/46564E, D, C, B respectively): The situation in Unit 3 is
notably different from the underlying sediments, and we recorded

260

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

the presence of calcareous elements in the form of bioclastic sand
(shell fragments, frustules) with signs of dissolution, along with
bone and organic matter (Fig. 5c). Enterolithic apatite also occurs
(Fig. 5e and f), along with lozenge-shaped crystal aggregates of
anhydrite that appear to have replaced gypsum (Fig. 5g).
The presence of the bioclastic remains in this unit shows that
sedimentation is increasingly terrestrial, with inputs of wind
blown sand derived ultimately from the beach zone. This aeolian
activity is possibly linked to drier conditions than those that
existed during the formation of the bedded sands and silt of Unit
2, for example. This interpretation is supported by the presence of
gypsum crystals and later replacement by anhydrite (Hill and

Forti, 1997: 191). The gypsum precipitation is tied to the accumulation of guano on the surface (see Shahack-Gross et al., 2004).
Associated with the gypsum formation and organic matter
accumulation is the dissolution of the calcareous bioclasts, which
are unstable and eventually would disappear under these
conditions.
Unit 4 (DB Sand 3 and 2; samples MB-03-04B/65B; 20222B/
20296B respectively): A dark organic horizon observed in the ﬁeld
is totally decalciﬁed, and in thin section appears to be a thin horizon
of burned bones and charred material that delineates the top of the
layer (Fig. 6a and b). Some areas show less bioturbation and have
a yelloweorange appearance, along with some features that

Figure 4. Sample MB-03-11B (20241). (a) Macrophotograph showing ﬁnely bedded sediment intercalated with yellow apatite-rich laminae on top of moderately sorted sediment
consisting of quartz sand, silt, and apatite ﬂakes. Plane-polarized light (PPL); height of view ¼ 60 mm. (b) Detail of ﬁnely bedded sediment (rectangle in Fig. 4a) intercalated with
yellow apatite-rich laminae (Ap). Such apatitic layers likely represent short term stabilization episodes where the phosphate accumulated on exposed surfaces and later slightly
dispersed by seeping water. Note also the crude sorting of each clastic laminae and the vesicles (V) attributed to water escape. PPL; width of view ¼ 10 mm. (c) Photomicrograph
showing grains of quartz sand and silt and yellow apatite matrix. PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (d) Same as Fig. 4c but in cross-polarized light (XPL). Note the undulose extinction in
one of the quartz grains (Qs). (e) Elongated rounded bone fragment surrounded by yellow-brown apatite-rich matrix, as well as quartz sand and silt. PPL; width of view ¼ 1.4 mm.
(f) Same as Fig. 5e but in XPL. The light grains are quartz sand and silt. Note the elongated nature of the structure of the bone apatite. [2BX100XP].

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

261

Figure 5. (a) Macrophotograph of sample MB-04-45F (46563) showing contact between compact silt and sand of Unit 1 at the base and the jumble of the overlying Unit 2, which
consists of loose silt and sand, mixed with darker nodules of apatite. This material ﬁlls a gully that is eroded into the underlying Unit 1 (cf. Fig. 3b). PPL; height of view ¼ 75 mm. (b)
Macrophotograph of sample MB-04-45E (46563) showing at the base similar sediment of Unit 2 as in Fig. 5a, but capped by an apatite-rich oxidized organic band at the top. PPL;
height of view ¼ 75 mm. (c) Macrophotograph of sample MB-04-45B (46563) with large pieces of angular roof spall intermixed with organic zones above and below it. Much of the
matrix is a mixture of sand and different forms of apatite. These include massive, crust-like clasts with quartz sand and occasional bone inclusions, thread-like grains (see Fig. 5e)
that occasionally contain bone, and ﬂuffy masses (see Fig. 5f). Note the lack of bedding other than the horizontal orientation of the roof spall. PPL; height of view ¼ 75 mm. (d) Detail
of dark, phosphate, and organic-rich band in rectangle of Fig. 5b. This material likely constitutes accumulation on an exposed surface. PPL; width of view ¼ 6.5 mm. (e) Dark and
light thread-like features of apatite (with arrows). PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (f) Fluffy accumulation of apatite within the matrix. Note that the left part which is organic-rich
with thread-like features gives way to pure yellowish apatite in the right part showing a layered, undulating appearance (enterolithic structure). PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (g)
Photomicrograph of sediments from Unit 3 (sample MB-04-44e [46564]) showing lozenge-shaped crystals of anhydrite (A) with remnant cores of gypsum (G). XPL; width of
view ¼ 1.4 mm.

suggest the precipitation of apatite; moreover, some bones appear
to be dissolving into an apatite mass (Fig. 6c).
The brownish color of the sediment in the ﬁeld appears to be
tied to the increase in charcoal, organic matter, and burnt bone as
seen in thin section. Although the top of Unit 4 in N97E97 (Fig. 3b)
is similar to the dark layer in Fig. 6a and b, these two proﬁles are not

physically correlated, so at this point it is not clear whether they are
the same deposit or represent two different episodes of burning.
Nevertheless, either or both possibilities indicate that Unit 4 is
strongly inﬂuenced by human inputs.
Unit 5 (Surface Sediments; samples MB-03-04a/65A; MB-0444A; 20222A/ 20296A/46564A): Unit 5 represents a widespread

262

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Figure 6. (a) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-4B (20222) from N97/E96 showing a sharp contact between loose yellow sand of Unit 5 and underlying brownish zone from Unit
4. PPL; height of view ¼ 75 mm. (b) Detail of surface shown in the rectangle of Fig. 6a, with fragments of charred (?) organic matter (CH), burned bone (B), and guano (G). PPL; width
of view ¼ 11 mm. (c) Sample MB-03-65 (20296) from the equivalent of Unit 5 in N97/E96. The bone fragment (B) in the upper left rests on and appears partially incorporated into
a mass of apatite (Ap). PPL; width of view ¼ 1.4 mm. (d) Upper part of Fig. 6a, Unit 5, showing dissolving shell fragment (S) within a loose sandy matrix containing dispersed (some
with vertical orientation) gray lozenge-shaped gypsum crystals (with arrows). XPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm.

surface cover. The unit comprises roof spall fragments (mostly sand
and granule sizes) embedded in a spongy, loose matrix consisting of
ﬁnely comminuted fecal material and many black particles mixed
with calcareous elements, such as shell, tiny gastropods, echinoderms, and calcareous sandstone, which are now dissolving
(Fig. 6d). In addition, it contains shreds of ﬁne organic matter and
charcoal, brown material (insect parts?), burnt shell, and ﬂuffy
micro aggregates of interstitial material, particularly at the top of
the unit. Although the chips of roof spall are ﬂat lying, bones are
commonly vertical. Overall, the layer appears to represent recently
reworked material, as shown by its content (shells, charcoal, burnt
bones) and loose consistency. It contains bioturbated material
reworked from the underlying sediments. The fact that the calcitic
shells and aggregates are currently dissolving indicates that the
process of phosphatization is still active.
It should be stressed that the Surface Sediments and Unit 3 are
the only deposits in this sequence that preserve some calcareous
material. Post-depositional chemical alteration in the form of
phosphatization has resulted in dissolution of any calcium source
(cf. Karkanas et al., 2000). However, even in Unit 3 where the
alteration is not so intensive, some dissolution of the more delicate
shells has probably occurred.

Entrance/North eastern area, Eastern area, and southern proﬁle
In the eastern part of the cave, near the entrance, deposits rich in
anthropogenic materials and features occur along the northern and

southern walls and in the central part of the cave (Sq. N91-93/E106110). Those along the walls are cemented to strongly indurated,
with carbonate plastered against the bedrock walls and perched on
isolated steps of bedrock. Those in the center of the cave, in the
eastern area excavations, include both indurated and softer
sediment.
Entrance/southern proﬁle (Lightly Cemented-Middle Stone Age
deposits: LC-MSA)
Field observations The sequence on the southern wall is ca. 1 m
thick and overall is composed of angular, sharp, 1 cm to 1 dm sized
clasts, some mixed with calcareous material and darker brown
organic-rich calcareous material (Fig. 7a). These were not
excavated, but we did take micromorphological samples from the
entire section. The deposits are divided into three subunits:
a) The lower ca. 25 cm of the sequence consist of angular ﬂattish
stones in a dark reddish brown matrix with bands of charcoal/
organic matter and what appeared to be altered ashes. The
subunit pinches out to the east.
b) The middle part of the sequence is ca. 30e45 cm thick and also
thins to the east (thickest along E106 squares). This subunit is
much lighter in color than the underlying sediment due to its
carbonate content. Well preserved shells occur, as well as some
charcoal.
c) The upper part of the sequence is partly eroded, especially to
the east. It is the most cemented unit of the south section is

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

263

Figure 7. (a) Photograph of southern proﬁle with the three main stratigraphic units (A, B, C) of the naturally eroded section. Note their stony content and the dark appearance of the
lower unit, the lighter of the middle, and the whitish color of the upper unit. (b) Photograph of northern proﬁle (northeastern area, LC-MSA) showing dark laminated lower part
truncated (with dashed line) by a gray and whitish crudely bedded upper part. Note the whitish root encrustations (R with small arrows) in the upper part, particularly evident here at the
contact with the lower part and the ﬂowstone on the top (F with big arrow). (c) Photograph of front middle part (Eastern area) showing indurated deposits resting upon the bedrock. The
rectangle corresponds to sample MB-03-23 (MAP-20254; see Fig. 14d). (d) Photograph of central area to the north of Fig. 7c showing combustion features upon roof spall.

similar to that observed on the northern side, the upper part
grades into whitish tufa-like carbonate.
Micromorphology Samples MB-03-07/20/21/22; 20235/20251/
20252/20253, respectively:
a) Upper part. From the top of MB-03-20A (20235A) down to the
middle part of thin section MB-03-21B (20252B) the coarse
component is composed of mainly rounded sand-sized quartz
and sericitized grains, with some rounded shell fragments and
a few scattered roof spall fragments. This upper part of the
sequence contains a few dispersed pieces of charcoal and one
or two very thin horizons rich in charred material, along with
some burnt bones; some of these dark bands do not appear to
be part of combustion features, but possibly represent humiﬁed organic matter with elongated structure that could
possibly have been used for other purposes, such as matting.
The cementing matrix of the entire breccia is almost pure
calcite, which appears as a networked alveolar root structure
(Fig. 8a and b) formed mostly by needle-shaped calcite (Fig. 8c).
In some cases, islands of a ﬁrst generation of micritic cement
can be recognized, but it is rarely recrystallized to sparite.
Irregular, ribbon-like masses of apatite occur, along with
localized isotropic domains representing apatitic replacements
from guano. In any case, the secondary calciﬁcation and root
casts have disturbed much of the original internal structure of
the deposits, making it difﬁcult to reconstitute the intact nature
of the combustion features.

b) Middle Part. The middle of the section (MB-03-21; 20252)
contains more shells than above, as shown by a pocket of shell
fragments. Locally the matrix is somewhat more porous than
above, with many rounded sand-size aggregates of what was
once the original material of micrite (wood ash?). In addition,
the charcoal is dispersed as ﬁne comminuted splinters, likely
due to the growth of carbonate, which has disrupted the
originally larger pieces.
c) Basal Part. The upper part of the basal sediments of the proﬁle
(MB-03-22A; 20253A), which tend to be much softer, darker, and
more organic rich (charcoal and organic matter) than above, is
similar to the overlying deposits. Below this, however, the
deposits become more massive (MB-03-22B, C; 20253B, C), and
voids and hypocoatings are more individualized and less spongy.
Nevertheless, both organic matter and charcoal are disrupted by
voids and growth of secondary carbonate (Fig. 9a and b).
Entrance/North eastern area (northern and eastern proﬁles)
(LC-MSA)
Field observations The deposits in the north area of the cave are
generally similar to those on the southern wall of the cave.
However, the southern and northeastern deposits differ in some
important ways. In the south, lithics are larger, roof fall is larger and
very blocky, and the mollusk shells are also larger and include
a very large patella. In the north, there are fewer mollusk shells, but
larger root casts occur than in the southern cemented section (see
below).

264

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Figure 8. (a) Sample MB-03-07 (20235). Microphotograph of alveolar structure root
casts (R) from southern proﬁle. Note the disturbance of the charred remains (with B
a burnt bone) by the rooting. PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (b) Same as above in XPL.
(c) Lublinite (L) crystals (needle-shaped calcite of biological origin) in between micritic
calcareous root casts (R). XPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm.

The lower part, ca. 30 cm (LC-MSA Lower), in the north proﬁle
comprises distinct layers and stringers of lighter and darker
blackish brown greasy organic matter/charcoal-rich sediment, in
some cases underlying whitish calcareous lenses (Fig. 7b); also
many lithics and angular pieces of reddish quartzite occur. The
northeastern deposits appear to be more matrix supported and less
clast supported than those on the south side.

The upper part, ca. 40 cm (LC-MSA Middle and Upper), is gray to
whitish and is more homogeneous and sandier than the underlying
sediment. Its lower contact is a clear erosional surface (Fig. 7b). The
upper part contains a marine mollusk shell-rich layer and is capped
by a massive, hard, whitish, sandy, calcareous crust, which drapes
over the underlying, subhorizontal deposits. This crust in turn is
overlain by white, carbonate-impregnated, sandy, aeolian deposits,
which are steeply inclined toward the rear of the cave; based on
their inclination, they extended back only to about E106-107. In any
case, both calcareous layers are penetrated by large root ﬁllings
(1e5 cm in diameter) composed of calcium carbonate. They are in
turn capped by a distinctive, clear, 1 cm thick ﬂowstone (Fig. 7b),
which occurs only on the north side of the cave.
Micromorphology At the beginning of our investigation we
studied a section of indurated anthropogenic deposits of the north
breccia. But since our 2005e2006 excavations did not reach the area
where the capping crust is present, we cored approximately 50 cm to
the north of the excavated area, pushing the core sufﬁciently deep to
sample the entire sequence of sands and lenses in the LC-MSA Upper.
This core was prepared into a micromorphology sample (46579),
and study of this sample shows this ﬂowstone cap on top of the
aeolian sand of the LC-MSA Upper. In addition, we studied a number
of isolated samples collected from various localities that were
stratigraphically above LC-MSA Upper, and also along the north wall.
a) Northern and eastern proﬁle: From top to bottom, we
observed as follows: In thin section of samples MB-04-27 [46546]
and 46579 we observed in the upper part a clear ﬂowstone crust
with ﬁbrous calcite (ﬂowstone) developed on top of sand (Fig. 10b).
The ﬂowstone itself has two distinct periods of growth separated by
an increment of aeolian sand that is also cemented by crystallization of organically precipitated calcite (roots, fungus, etc.). The two
ﬂowstone layers, however, laterally join again to form a compound
one. Each ﬂowstone layer has multiple laminae with several growth
lines of imperfect crystal coalescence (Kendall and Broughton,
1978). Along these growth lines and inside the laminae are sand
grains of aeolian origin. All grains have fresh outer surfaces so they
cannot be derived from the already existing aeolianites, since these
were already cemented. Thus, any clast derived from these would
be a mixture of sand grains and calcitic cement. This would suggest
that sand was occasionally blowing inside the cave as the ﬂowstone
was forming. Aeolian sand separates the two layers, also suggesting
that sand was blowing inside the cave at that time. Laterally, the
ﬂowstone is sand free but does contain growth lines and inclusions.
This is most consistent with an area protected behind a hump of the
dune (as preserved on the cave wall) that partially closed the cave,
but surely made it uninhabitable.
The ﬂowstone rests upon sparitic root ﬁlls that penetrate into
a brown organic mat. In the lowermost part, sand is scattered
throughout, although it is locally concentrated into broad bands.
The deposits have a spongier microstructure than those above, with
more typical looking, individualized, and less massive carbonate
hypocoatings. This perhaps relates to the fact that they are further
below the ﬂowstone capping; hence there is a reduced supply of
carbonate. There is not much evidence for human activity in this
sample, except for a rounded 1 mm size piece of charcoal.
Overall, the sequence seems to represent increasingly wet
conditions, with ﬁrst the formation of a root/organic mat, followed
by calciﬁcation along roots of organic material, and ﬁnally
swamping of the surface with actively forming speleothem layer of
dense calcite.
Sample MB-03-18A; 20249A (Upper LC-MSA) show a massive
deposit with scatters of quartz sand, bone and burnt bone, shells
(many burnt), egg shell, and shreds of charcoal; rounded sand-sized
grains occur but not in the large amounts as found in the south
breccia. Crude linear arrangement of grains and rounded and

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

265

Figure 9. (a) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-22C (20253) from the lower part of southern proﬁle showing stringers of burnt remains in between roof spall. (b) Detail of burnt
remains in MB-03-22B (MAP-20253). Note the abundant black charred remains, burnt bone (B), but also the circular root casts (R) that disturb the original structure. Width of
view ¼ 15.5 mm. (c) Microphotograph of sample MB-03-18A (20249) showing crudely bedded dispersed charred material and quartz sand (Qz) in a calcareous matrix with vesicular
(V) and vughy porosity, and linear grain arrangement (dashed line). A fragment of charcoal is partly preserved (Ch) due to complete grinding of this area during the preparation of
the thin section. PPL; width of view ¼ 6.5 mm. (d) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-18B (20249) showing erosional sharp contact between a beige sandy upper part and a dark
lower part full of black charred remains and burnt bone. PPL; height of view ¼ 75 mm. (e) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-18C (20249) showing superimposed dark combustion
sublayers with abundant burnt bone. With arrow an in situ crushed bone probably by trampling. PPL; height of view ¼ 75 mm. (f) Microphotograph of calcareous root casts (R) from
northern proﬁle. Sample MB-03-18C (20249). XPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm.

266

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Figure 10. (a) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-18D (MAP-20249) with superimposed dark combustion features and abundant burnt bone. Height of view ¼ 75 mm. (b)
Microphotograph of sample (46579). Two superimposed ﬂowstone layers of ﬁbrous calcite (F1 and F2) separated by a layer of aeolian sand (white grains). Note aeolian sand grains
enclosed in the ﬂowstone (with arrow). The lower ﬂowstones is in erosional contact with aeolian sand (white grains) cemented with micritic calcite. XPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm.

elongated vesicular structure is visible in the anthropogenic
material (Fig. 9c). This interior arrangement of grains suggests that
the sediment has been moved from its original location of
combustion, probably by liquefaction (Bertran and Texier, 1999). All
of the above has been cemented by micritic calcite that resulted in
the formation of a continuous mass with some polyconcave vughs;
some of the voids have lublinite ﬁllings. Recrystallization of calcite
has produced patches of coarser crystals. Finally, some circular, very
localized domains of phosphate were observed.
Sample MB-03-18B; 20249B (transition of Upper to Middle
LC-MSA) exhibits in situ burned zones. In the upper part there is
a thin undisturbed feature within a matrix that is the same as that
of the previous thin section. At the bottom there is a larger in situ
burnt zone with a truncated upper surface; it contains a large bone
fragment (Fig. 9d). In the upper part, there is also a pocket full of
fragments of shells, some of which are very well rounded. In
addition, ﬁne sand-sized alveolar carbonate cementation (see
Fig. 9f) mirrors that observed on the south proﬁle. This results in
the production of ﬁne shreds of organic matter that appear to be
ﬂoating within the mass of carbonate.
Sample MB-03-18C; 20249C (transition from Middle to Lower
LC-MSA) shows that farther down (as was with the south breccia),
the sediment changes to an overlapping sequence of layers rich in
charred material, charcoal fragments, and burnt bones, all of which
appear to represent several bands of in situ ﬁres (Fig. 9e). It is
noteworthy that at the top is a large fragment of bone that is
crushed in place with no redistribution of the fragments, thus
signifying trampling. Yet, some charcoal and bone in the lower lefthand corner are on end and seem to be disturbed, possibly by
bioturbation or trampling. There seems to be another small increment of sand that looks water lain. The calcite cement between the
charcoal-rich layers has the form of alveolar root structures (Fig. 9f),
and in some zones, apatite is replaced by the calcitic cement.
Sample MB-03-18D; 20249D (Lower LC-MSA) from the basal
sediment appears to be more well bedded than the layers above,
with thinner stringers of calcitic ash and organic matter (Fig. 10a).
As above, secondary calcite cementation is represented by a feltlike mass of interwoven ﬁne crystals. Although a pocket of bioturbated material is visible in the lower left-hand corner, most of
the sediment seems to represent a sequence of very ﬁne in situ ﬁres
with some hearth cleanout separating them. In this slide, the
remains of at least four or ﬁve intact ﬁres were observed.

Both in the north and in the south proﬁle the breccias are very
rich in burnt remains, although the south proﬁle has a more clearly
preserved upper sandier layer that is of aeolian origin; the
anthropogenic component there is very scant.
b) Distinct features along the northern wall of cave (LC-MSA)
were observed as follows:
Samples 46446 and 46447 come from close to where the steeply
sloping aeolianite surface is in contact and levels out with the
ﬂowstone. In thin section they consist of well sorted medium sand
(mainly quartz, but also some feldspar) with vadose micritic
cementation (Fig. 11b) and ﬁne calcareous root casts that form
a calcareous cap (Fig. 11c). Thus, they represent a slightly cemented
aeolianite formed by calcite that precipitated from dripping water
and was inundated by calcareous root mats.
Sample MB-4-32 (46551) is from the cave entrance where ca.
3 cm thick cemented sand is draped against the wall, dipping at 65
to the south. One can see that this is a continuation of the Upper
LC-MSA projecting out to the mouth of the cave, which further
suggests that the LC-MSA at one time projected well out beyond the
current cave mouth onto a sediment plane that abutted the cliff
face. This sample is very fresh and hard, with numerous shells and
lithics. In thin section, it consists of a dense packing of fresh bone,
ash, and shell. Locally, the charcoal is perforated by roots, with
hypocoatings and ﬁllings of sparite. The sample represents essentially cemented sand and hearth material that was possibly blown
around or moved by humans as hearth rake-out.
Sample MB-04-33 (46552) likely derived from the same layer
remnant adhering to the north wall of the cave. The sample comes
from the north side, in the highest occupation layers (by elevation)
in the cave. It consists of a series of partly cemented burned layers
about 1 cm thick, composed of black organic bands separated by
white layers about 1 cm thick; it is capped by a 2e3 cm thick hard,
well cemented ash with a darker colored stringer in the center.
Underlying the lower black layer is ca. 5 mm thick rubeﬁed zone.
Laterally, 1 mm sized coalescing white patches are likely gypsum.
In thin section, the upper part is composed of a mat of large
interlocking gypsum crystals with interstitial hematite, which
appear to have recrystallized from smaller crystals and ‘exploded’
the matrix (Fig. 11a), which contains some shell and bone fragments. The ﬁne size of the gypsum suggests that no soil water was
present, as gypsum would have dissolved completely and not
recrystallized. As such, recrystallization would have occurred under

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

267

the gypsum. This calcite is spherical, often of uniform size, and
some grains possess a radial structure but without an optical cross.
The interstitial hematite is accompanied by some calcite.
The lower part of the sample is similar to the upper part, with
secondary formation of spherulites that postdates the gypsum. The
lowermost part of the sample is comprised of massive calcite that
impregnates charcoal and organic matter, thin weathered shell
fragments, bone fragments, and crust/enterolithic-type guano pieces.
The contact between the upper part and the lower massive micritic
calcite is abrupt and sharp. Moreover, the micrite is recrystallizing to
sparite. There are a few features that look like roots but they are not
abundant. The structure becomes vughy in the lower part.
In summary, this sample seems to be a cap of tufa developed on
top of a previously existing surface that comprises sediment and
likely human occupation material, such as charcoal/organic matter
and bone. The sharp contact between the tufa and the overlying
gypsum appears to be due to the gypsum attacking the basal
carbonate zone. The presence of gypsum might be related to
decayed guano (cf. Shahack-Gross et al., 2004).
Entrance/Eastern area
Field observations Between the north and south walls, in the
central part of the cave along the main axis, are pockets of sediment
that are bounded on both sides by the bedrock steps mentioned
above (Fig. 7c). These deposits are thus, not physically connected to
the south and north brecciated sediments, although they do rest
directly on bedrock. They are best exposed in Sq. N91-93/E108109 and are described below from bottom to top:
a) Loose stony layer consisting of angular bedrock fragments,
mostly clast supported; it rests upon spalling bedrock.
b) Strongly indurated whitish layer, mostly homogeneous but
locally containing yellowish spots and grayish lenses. Large vughs
were observed. Towards the back of the cave it gradually becomes
a loose stony layer that is not much different from layer a.
c) Moderately indurated layer with yellowish spots. It also
becomes a loose sandy to stony layer towards the back of the
cave. A few dark to black stringers of probably burnt remains
were identiﬁed.
d) A dark (almost black) thin layer, which probably represents
burnt remains.
e) Gravelly sands, slightly cemented in places.
f) Alternating gray, black, and white lenses representing hearths.
g) Recent reddish aeolian sand cover.

Figure 11. (a). Microphotograph of sample MB-04-33 (46552) showing interlocking
gypsum crystals, opaque interstitial hematite (H), burnt bone (B), and dark brownish
altered organic matter (OM). XPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm. (b) Microphotograph of
calcareous crust with transverse (Rt) and longitudinal (Rl) sections of calcareous root casts
with pseudomorphic cellular structure (sample 46447). PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm.
(c) Microphotograph of sample 46447 showing aeolian sand cemented with vadose
calcite (meniscus [M] and pendants [P] features). PPL; width of view ¼ 1.4 mm.

very barely moist conditions; the deposit was never wet. In places it
seems that there are remnants of organic aggregates that are being
oxidized. These aggregates probably are related to the formation of
the hematite. Notable is a band of spherulitic calcite that postdates

The total thickness of this sequence is ca. 40 cm.
Excavations in 2004 took place along the N92 line and in 2005
along the N93 and N93.5 line, successively revealing deposits at
slightly higher elevations than those described above, although they
are not clearly connected stratigraphically. At the base, a thin roof
spall layer (Lower Roof Spall) is overlain by at least two multicolored
blackish lenses, likely representing combustion features (Fig. 7d);
this layer occurs in a gray granular matrix with some dispersed
fragments of roof spall (Upper Roof Spall) transitioning to deposits
with less roof spall (Shelly Brown Sand). These were covered with
a sharp, undulating contact by a loose, crudely stratiﬁed stony sandy
deposit, rich in roof spall and shell fragments (Truncation Fill).
Moreover, both shell and rock fragments tended to be steeply
dipping and oriented overall to the southeast; they appeared to ﬁll in
the underlying erosional surface. The lithology and internal organization of this upper layer along with its sharp, erosional basal
contact, gave the impression of its being a debris ﬂow.
Micromorphology Samples come from various portions of the
excavated area in the central part of the cave (N91-93/E106-110).

268

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

These excavations revealed deposits up to 20 cm thick resting on
bedrock.
a) Middle of eastern area (Samples MB-03-05/6/14/23/24/25;
20232/20233/20245/20254/20255/20256): The upper part of the
sequence consists of roof spall embedded in a matrix of highly
comminuted gray, dirty, dissolving calcitic aggregates. Diamondshaped gypsum crystals, anhydrite aggregates (identiﬁed also by
FTIR), and cubic halite crystals locally cement the material. Shell
fragments with etched edges, an abundance of burnt and unburnt
bone, and charcoal fragments also occur. In thin section MB-03-25A
(20256A), there is a horizon rich in charcoal fragments probably
representing in situ burnt remains. Recent roots are also visible in
this top layer.
Below the top layer there is a phosphatized zone that in some
areas is relatively thick (e.g., lower parts of samples MB-03-05A
[20232A] and MB-03-06 [20233], and thin section MB-03-05B
[20232B]) and in other areas it is more diffuse and thinner (lower
part of thin section MB-03-25A [20256A]). Clearly identiﬁable
precipitated apatite nodules (Fig. 12a; also some of the bone is
losing its interior structure due to recrystallization) can be recognized together with stringers of charcoal-rich material and burnt
bones (Fig. 12b and c), as well as some iron staining. The lens-like
domains, rich in ﬁnely comminuted charcoal, as well as sand-size
bone, appear to be the remains of combustion features. However,
here they are not strictly in place, but have been moved somewhat.
A brown/black zone in the middle appears to be more strictly intact.
Below this apatite-rich layer there is a lower calciﬁed layer with
polyconcave vughs. In some thin sections (e.g., MB-03-25A
[20256A]), the calciﬁed layer is replaced gradually by overlying
apatite and may also be mixed with the top layer. Gypsum crystals
were identiﬁed in the intermediate zone.
The calcitic cement of the lower layer is mostly sparitic with
equant or sometimes diamond-shaped crystals (Fig. 13a), which
probably represent pseudomorphs after gypsum. Clearly the calcite
cement engulfs and replaces yellowish apatite nodules (Fig. 13b).
In thin section MB-03-25b (20256B), the entire upper part of the
section is capped by a marked ﬂowstone (Fig. 14a and b), including
some cells of calciﬁed rootlets (Fig. 14c) that resemble those found
in the north and south proﬁles. In thin sections MB-03-14/23/25B
(202254/20255/20256), in between the sparitic calcite, areas with
micritic calcite commonly contain high amounts of microfragments
of charred material (Fig. 14d). In one case, a discrete horizon with
abundant charred material is less cemented than the surrounding
area and contains some gypsum crystals. Calcitic shells and burnt
bone fragments are common. In thin section MB-03-14 (202254),
recrystallized ash remains (cf. Karkanas et al., 2007) are clearly in
situ with ash pseudomorphs of cellular structures (Fig. 15a).
Based on our observations, it appears that the sediment of the
middle eastern area has gone through a sequence of events that most
likely started with a period of moderate phosphatization, which did
not affect the calcitic shells. It was followed by a stage of calciﬁcation
that cemented all the material. After that it seems that the deposit
was exposed at the same time that ﬂowstone formed, which afterwards was subjected to renewed phosphatization at the surface. At
the same time, human activities introduced some calcitic material to
the system in the form of ash and shells that are currently undergoing dissolution. The calciﬁcation event took place during the
formation (burial) of the sequence, whereas the second phosphatization event occurred during the erosion and exposure of the
sequence. It also appears that today the prevailing process in this
area of the cave is decalciﬁcation and phosphatization. Although
during excavation the stratigraphic correlation of this area with the
rest of the northeastern area and southern proﬁle (LC-MSA) was not
resolved, we suggest, based on the micromorphological analysis, that
the lower, mostly cemented calcareous part and the strongly

Figure 12. (a). Microphotograph of sample MB-03-05A (20235) showing detail of an
apatite nodule with precipitation features (shrinkage fractures). PPL; width of
view ¼ 1.4 mm. (b) Macrophotograph of in situ combustion feature. PPL; width of
view ¼ 14 mm. (c) Detail of combustion feature of sample MB-03-05A (20235)
showing charred material and burnt bone (B). PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm.

phosphatized zone, as described above, are most likely remnants of
the LC-MSA deposits found in the north and south proﬁles. The
remnant must also correspond with the basal part of the Lower Roof
Spall of the front northern area (see below).
b) Northern portion of eastern area (N93.5 Line): Samples
MB-04-03/04 (46522/46523) exhibit loose, pale yellow sandy

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

269

Figure 13. (a) Microphotograph of sample MB-03-24A (20255) showing lozenge-shaped calcite pseudomorphic after gypsum (arrow). Black areas are isotropic apatite replaced by
calcite (see Fig. 13b). XPL; width of view ¼ 0. 7 mm. (b) Detail of sample MB-03-24A. Apatite nodule (A) replaced by calcite. XP; width of view ¼ 1.4 mm.

material at the top (Truncated Fill), overlying sharp boundary
bedded anthropogenic deposits and combustion features with
some roof spall (Shelly Brown Sand/Upper Roof Spall), and ﬁnally
roof spall with some anthropogenic input (Lower Roof Spall).
In thin section, the uppermost zone (MB-04-03A/04A; 46522A/
46523A) consists of clasts of impure porous travertine (tufa) and
phosphatized tufa, roof spall, and apatite nodules within a ﬂuffy
loose matrix rich in organic matter. Some bone appears to be burnt.
Shell fragments and other carbonate forms are being dissolved.
Locally there is a strong inclined parallel orientation of the shells

(Fig. 15b). As elsewhere close to the surface, calcite is dissolving
(Fig. 15c and d). The sediment comprises relatively recent, trampled
cultural material, reworked by gravity ﬂow processes. It is imbedded with guano and is in the process of being dissolved. It also
resembles the surface sediment at the rear of the cave.
This uppermost zone has a sharp boundary with the underlying
layer. The latter consists of more compact and organic-rich material
(MB-04-03B, C/4B; 46522B, C/46523B; corresponding to dark zone
in the ﬁeld) and contains digested and burned bones. In MB-04-03B
(46522B), particularly, the combustion zone is divided into two

Figure 14. (a) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-25b (20256) showing ﬂowstone (with dashed line) running along the middle of the thin section. PPL; width of view ¼ 75 mm. (b)
Detail of the thin ﬂowstone (F) consisting of ﬁbrous calcite. Such a feature implies that the surface was exposed (compare with Fig. 10b). XPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm. (c) Root cast
(R) in indurated central part. XPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (d) Macrophotograph of sample MB-03-23 (20254). Fine roof spall cemented with calcite and dark pockets of burnt
remains (with arrow). PPL; Height of photo ¼ 75 mm.

270

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Figure 15. (a) Recrystallized ash with dotted dark gray micrite, charcoal fragments (arrow 1), and ash pseudomorphs with cellular structure (arrow 2). Sample MB-03-14 (20245).
PPL; width of view ¼ 2.8 mm. (b) Strongly inclined, parallel calcareous shell fragments inside sandy clastic matrix in debris ﬂow deposit, upper part of sample MB-04-3A (46522).
XPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm. (c) Microphotograph of sample MB-04-3B (46522) showing a dissolving calcareous shell inside yellowish apatite with enterolithic structure. PPL;
width of view ¼ 1.4 mm. (d) Same as above in XPL.

distinct burnt sublayers. Locally, at the base of MB-04-04B
(46523B), bone is crushed and broken down in place as a result of
trampling rather than transport (Fig. 16a), indicating that the
combustion feature is essentially intact. The presence of a reddened
sediment aggregate, which is likely rubeﬁed by heating, supports
the above conclusion. In MB-04-03C (46522C), the burnt remains
overlie a similar reddened apatite-rich substrate implying the
presence of an in situ feature. In all, it seems that this central zone
represents combustion, organic-rich occupation horizons, and
either slightly trampled or intact bone.
At the very base of MB-04-04C (46523C), the sediments are
similar overall to those of the middle part but with a less well
pronounced organic-rich zone. Thin stringers of charcoal occur that
suggest intact remnants of ﬁre, although some seem to be trampled. In addition, remnants of phosphatic crust type and nodular
apatite occur along with some bone. Charcoal occurs with ash
inside pores and voids, but it is more dispersed within the roof
spall. A fragment of aeolian sandstone or perhaps breccia/tufalooking material was observed (Fig. 16b). At the lower part of MB04-03C (46522) there is an apatite-rich zone with enterolithic
structure in between dissolving calcite crystals that are morphologically similar to gypsum rhombic crystals (calcite pseudomorphic after gypsum; Fig. 16c). Bladed crystals of calcite are growing
inwards in the rhombic voids produced by the dissolution of the
original gypsum (Fig. 16d). There is deﬁnite anthropogenic input in
this layer, although very few artifacts were found within it. The
lower part of MB-04-03C (46522) shows some similarities with the
cemented calcareous layers in the front middle area assigned to
remnants of LC-MSA deposits (i.e., apatite and calcite cementation
pseudomorphic after gypsum).

Summary of geological history of the cave
The oldest deposits of the cave occur in the Western area (rear
part of the cave) where laminated silts and sands of Unit 1
(Laminated Facies) with local guano accumulations are present. Silt
and sand originated from roof spall with little contribution from
outside sources and were redistributed by spring seep. Guano was
deposited on a brieﬂy exposed substrate as apatite stringers and
ﬂuffy aggregates. The deposits become successively drier upwards
where sediments are characterized by less deﬁned and more
disturbed bedding.
On the basis of the occurrence of the horizontally bedded,
laminated water lain deposits at the rear of the cave, we are certain
that the conﬁguration of the cave at the time of their deposition
was totally different from that of the present. The spring water
responsible for the formation of the water lain sequence was
related to a water table level that would have been very close to sea
level. The small thickness of the overlying quartzite bedrock and its
dense fracture system facilitates fast downward movement of the
inﬁltrated groundwater forming a temporary water table that is
always close to sea level.
In addition, the horizontal bedding of the deposits implies that
the topography was more or less horizontal and at the front of the
cave there was probably dryland that favored the lateral continuation of this horizontal topography. In other words, these horizontal deposits had to have been graded to a previously existing
land surface more or less at this elevation, which likely sloped
down to nearby sea shore. This scenario is consistent with the
existence of the rounded boulders at the bottom of the laminated
facies, which are the product of high-energy processes most likely

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

271

Figure 16. (a) In situ fractured (trampled) burnt bone on top of charred remains. PPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm. (b) Fragment of quartz sand (Q) cemented with calcite (compare with
Fig. 10b) inside decalciﬁed roof spall. Sample MB-04-4C (46523). XPL; width of view ¼ 11 mm. (c) Microphotograph of sample MB-04-4C (46523). Apatite (isotropic) replacing
calcite pseudomorphic after rhombic gypsum. XPL; width of view ¼ 1.4 mm. (d) Bladed calcite growing inside dissolved rhombic gypsum, only the outer rim of the latter is
preserved. XPL; width of view ¼ 0.7 mm.

associated with a beach. Such boulders are typical of the modern
beach in front of the cave. However, it is possible that the boulder
deposit and Laminated Facies are separated by a signiﬁcant amount
of time, since, as it will be shown below, the cave underwent
several episodes of erosion and deposition.
Optically stimulated luminescence dating (OSL) shows that the
Laminated Facies dates to MIS 11 (see Table 1; Jacobs, 2010). Thus,
on the basis of our observations above, we suggest that MIS 11 sea
level was near the cave height at this time.
There was almost certainly a signiﬁcant erosion event after the
formation of the Laminated Facies, as represented by the steeply
sloping truncation surface at the base of Unit 2 (LB Silt through to
LBG Sand 3 and 2 and DB Sand 4a, b, c). This erosional feature was
caused by subsidence of Unit 2, which was at least seasonally wet.
Subsidence is evident in the attenuated and discontinuous nature
of the organic stringers showing that the sediment must have also
gradually slumped along the direction of the gully, but without
losing its overall cohesion. Toward the top of the unit, organic
matter accumulated on exposed surfaces and became oxidized,
implying periods of stability and a pause in clastic sedimentation.
However, phosphatic guano continued to accumulate and was
incorporated and reworked into the gully deposits in a slightly
acidic microenvironment where calcareous shells were dissolving
(cf. Karkanas et al., 2000). Anthropogenic input is in the form of
discrete dark lenses and stringers containing charcoal and charred
material together with burnt bone.
Some of these lenses are likely trampled burnt remains and not
dumped material. If they represented dumped material they should
be mixed with other natural sediment and not form clear, discrete
lenses. In any case, occupation seems sporadic as natural sedimentary processes generally dominate the sequence.

It is also important to note at this point that Unit 1 (Laminated
Facies) forms an isolated hump at the rear of the cave and obviously
itdor its lateral equivalent depositdhas been truncated and totally
eroded away from the central and front part of the cave, before the
formation of Unit 2 at the rear and the north and south breccias at
the front, both being much younger than Unit 1 (Table 1). The
reason for this erosion is not obvious, but given the proximity of the
cave to the sea it is highly probable that wave action associated
with sea surges had removed most of the Unit 1 deposits. This
erosional phase is probably responsible for the slumping of the
sediments of Unit 2, since the formation of an abruptly sloping
erosional surface would have left the overlying sediment without
support, thereby allowing it to slip forward.
The sediments of Units 3 and 4 (LBG Sand 1 and DB Sand 3 and
2) at the rear of the cave are not much different from the previously
deposited sediment of Unit 2, but they are certainly more calcareous; although the calcareous material is in a state of being dissolved the decalciﬁcation is not complete as it is in the units below.
It is not known to what period this diagenetic change corresponds,
but from the available dates (Table 1) it seems that there must be
some considerable hiatus somewhere at the base of Unit 3.
Nevertheless, stabilization of the surface under more arid conditions and more accumulation of burned bone, charcoal, and organic
matter is evident. Finally, there is a widespread truncation of living
surfaces associated with the deposition of loose sand at the surface,
with the destruction of shell and other carbonate elements, and the
deposition of apatite.
As implied by the geometry of the deposits and the chronology
of events (Table 1), while Unit 2 was aggrading at the back of the
cave, or probably even earlier, there was human occupation of the
cave at the front as indicated in the south and north breccia sections

272

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

Table 1
Summary of the depositional history of the cave.a
Approximate
age

Depositional and erosional event

Early-middle
Pleistocene
MIS 11

Formation of the cave into quartzite bedrock by
mechanical action during prolonged high sea stands.
Deposition of sandy to silty Laminated Facies by spring
seep. Sea was very close to the cave.
Erosion of Laminated Facies by sea surge (?)
Formation of LC-MSA Lower (north and south breccia at
the front of the cave) mainly by anthropogenic processes
(superimposed combustion features). Formation of Unit 2
at the rear of the cave by a combination of anthropogenic
(thin combustion features) and natural processes (roof
spalling, aeolian activity, slumping).
Moderate erosion of the already deposited sediment at
the front of the cave as seen at the contact
of LC-MSA Lower and Middle, and inferred change of
microenvironmental conditions at the contact
of Unit 2 and Unit 3 at the rear of the cave.
Formation of LC-MSA Middle and Upper at the cave front.
Gradual increase of aeolian input; anthropogenic input in
the form of redistributed burnt remains. First stage of
cementation of the aeolian sand deposits facilitated by
biological action (roots, fungus, etc.). Possible formation of
some part of Unit 3 at the back of the cave (formation
processes mostly similar to Unit 2). Erosion of front
indurated sediment (breccias) most likely by sea surge
during the high stand of MIS5e.
Formation of Lower Roof Spall, Upper Roof Spall, and
Shelly Brown Sand at the front of the cave on the
bedrock and on top of some remnants of the LC-MSA
deposits, and of Unit 4 at the rear.
Mostly anthropogenic depositional processes in the form of
superimposed combustion features.
At the rear natural processes were more intense.
Formation of a capping dune. The cave is incompletely sealed
making possible the colonization of the aeolian
deposits with plants. The dune is slightly cemented with
vadose calcite.
Formation of ﬂowstone in an area protected by the dune.
Occasionally aeolian sand was incorporated into
the ﬂowstone.
Erosion of the capping dune and re-opening of the cave due
probably to weathering processes.
Sporadic occupation of the cave in the form of combustion
features. Debris ﬂows operating on the surface mobilize and
disturb some of the pre-existing deposits.

MIS 11 (?)
180e150 ka

150e130 ka

130e123 ka

115e90 ka

90 ka

90e40 ka

40 ka?
40 ka-recent

a

Approximate ages are based on Marean et al. (2010) and Jacobs (2010).

(LC-MSA Lower). This occupation is characterized by anthropogenic
accumulations of bone, shells, and combustion features, which are
only partially intact and more commonly redistributed by trampling, hearth cleaning, etc. Some penecontemporaneous accumulations of rockfall, guano, and organic matsdboth burned and
unburneddwere also identiﬁed. Guano is particularly visible as
domains of apatite at the base of the central section. Overall,
anthropogenic deposits in the eastern area (front) of the cave are
more common than in the western (rear), and features representing both intact and redistributed combustion can be observed in
the eastern area. Our ability to ‘read’ these features is hampered by
the disturbance and growth of secondary carbonate. It not only has
cemented and recrystallized the original ash, but has physically
disrupted the organic matter, particularly in the case of alveolar
root carbonate.
The deposits become sandier toward the top of the section
(LC-MSA Middle and Upper), apparently corresponding to a layer
which truncates the largely anthropogenic underlying deposits.
Some anthropogenic input is evident mainly as shell-rich horizons,
and redistributed and recrystallized ash remains. The uppermost
layer (LC-MSA Upper) is mainly an aeolian sandy deposit rich in
calcitic ash and cemented by massive micritic calcite.

The entire front section was eroded almost completely (except
for a few, totally isolated islands of sediment at the center resting
on the bedrock and the basal part of Lower Roof Spall). The causes
of erosion are not clear but they could be a result of one or
a combination of factors discussed below.
Possibly, extreme sea storms during periods of higher sea level
(e.g., MIS 5e which according to the literature should have been at
the range of 5 m higher than the present day; Hendey and Volman,
1986; Lambeck and Nakada, 1992) may have eroded sediments.
Indeed, wave energy is the only high-energy source to remove
previously indurated deposits. However, this would imply
a different conﬁguration of the cave whereby its entrance would
have been directly exposed to wave energy. The collapsed bedrock
blocks in front of the cave are evidence of the gradual retreat of the
cliff front above the entrance. Indeed the remnants of LC-MSA in
the very front of the cave suggest that the cave ﬂoor deposits were
much more elongated and extensive during their formation.
Furthermore, the cultural deposits in the central entrance (Eastern)
area were formed on top of the already eroded breccia. These
cultural deposits are just a little younger than the age of the MIS 5e
aeolian deposits of the north breccia (see below and Table 1). This
places the erosion event of the breccia inside MIS 5e.
Alternatively, chemical breakdown of breccia, facilitated by
guano accumulation as seen in samples MB-4-38 (46557) and
MB-04-33 (46552) that were collected from remnants of north
breccia along the cave wall, may have been responsible for erosion.
Other than decalciﬁcation problems, it is difﬁcult to imagine other,
high-energy processes that could ﬂush out the cave, leaving only
witness sediments on north and south bedrock benches, and only
cemented remnants in the basal center.
Localized ﬂowstones formed on remnants of deposits in the
front central area of the cave as a result of dripping water. There
may be a relationship between the ﬂowstones and crusts found
elsewhere in the interior of the cave, especially in the upper
stratigraphic units. High porosities in deposits on the bedrock
suggest possible addition of perched water on top of bedrock
inﬂuencing the lowermost sediments in the cave center. Above
these cemented deposits and remnants, renewed occupations took
place (Lower and Upper Roof Spall and Shelly Brown Sand) with
burning features and accumulations of bones and shells that are
overall quite similar to deposits in the north and south breccia
sections. However, these deposits are loose; they are not consolidated by previous phases of rooting and cementation. They also
carry inclusions of aeolianite clasts that are most likely derived
from the erosion of the aeolianite found on top of the breccias.
Finally, a later incursion of dune sand was observed with the slip
face steeply inclined toward the rear of the cave (Table 1). The
aeolian sand was in turn covered by a dense ﬁne root mat, as well as
coarse roots. The ﬁne roots in particular affect all the underlying
deposits and extend as far as the base of the deposits in the deep
central area. The coarse roots tend to be concentrated on the north
side of the cave, which has concentrations of most of the water
derived features (e.g., ﬂowstones). The ﬁne root calcite is more
abundant in the central and southern sections. The presence of this
extensive root mat everywhere in the deposits demonstrates that
the cave was not totally closed at the time of this phase of aeolian
activity. However, some root matting was already active during the
accretion of the ﬁrst aeolian sand situated below the capping dune.
Finally, the dune was cemented with vadose calcitic
cementdassociated with dripping waterdthat eventually culminated in the formation of ﬂowstone in pools beyond the rear of the
dune.
The ﬂowstone was formed as a combined result of three likely
causes. First, the capping dune formation might have almost
completely sealed the cave. However, the identiﬁcation of aeolian

P. Karkanas, P. Goldberg / Journal of Human Evolution 59 (2010) 256e273

sand trapped inside the ﬂowstone as it formed implies that the cave
was not totally sealed, although it was not available to human
occupation. Alternatively, an increase in water/wetter climate (cf.
the observed columnar nature of ﬂowstone formed under equilibrium conditions in mostly closed cave conditions; Frisia et al.
(2000)) may have resulted in the ﬂowstone. Or, occlusion and
plugging of pore space by previous carbonate accumulation could
be responsible.
The erosion of the capping dune and the opening of the cave
should be assigned to a much later period as the continuing ﬂowstone formation on the back of the dune implies (Table 1). The
erosion of the slightly cemented dune could be easier and might
have been facilitated by further collapse of part of the entrance,
rendering the foot of the dune vulnerable to open weathering
processes. Finally, some of these deposited materials together with
younger anthropogenic inputs were subjected to down slope
movement by debris ﬂows (Truncation Fill) along an erosional
surface.
Conclusions
A detailed micromorphological analysis of the isolated sedimentary exposures in PP13B was used to reconstruct the complex
sedimentary evolution of the cave. Sea level oscillations played
a major role in the sedimentation pattern and erosion events. The
oldest sediments comprise boulder beach deposits and spring,
water lain laminated silts that were deposited during high sea
levels at or near the cave height. From then on, human occupation
produced considerable amounts of anthropogenic sediment with
frequent preservation of intact and disturbed combustion features
produced by human activities. At the back of the cave discrete
episodes of anthropogenic sedimentation alternate with natural
deposits, whereas at the front occupational deposits predominate.
Roof spall and aeolian activity were the main natural sources of
sedimentation, and their relative contributions alternate through
time. During lower sea levels aeolian activity was particularly
prominent and sand dune incursion resulted in partial sealing of
the cave, which in turn favored ﬂowstone formations. During most
of these intervals humans were not present in the cave. Minor
erosional events associated with natural processes (soliﬂuction,
slumping, and debris ﬂow), biological activity (plant colonization,
root encrustation, and guano accumulation), and diagenetic alterations (phosphatization, oxidation, and calcite cementation)
affected the occupational deposits producing moderate, local
disturbances and alterations or losses of cultural components
(organics, shells, and ash). However, sea surges and spray during
sea level high stands (but never cresting into the cave) were
probably responsible for the frequent large scale erosional events
that resulted in the loss of a major part of the sedimentary
sequence. Nevertheless, through detailed comparisons of the
sedimentary facies and diagenetic trends it was possible to
undertake a comprehensive reconstruction of the sedimentary
history of the deposits and to develop a robust reconstruction of the
relationship of the different, sometimes isolated stratigraphic units.

273

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the National Science Foundation
(USA; grants # BCS-9912465, BCS-0130713, and BCS-0524087 to
Marean), funding from the Huxleys, the Hyde Family Trust Foundation, the Institute for Human Origins, and Arizona State University.
References
Bertran, P., Texier, J.-P., 1999. Facies and microfacies of slope deposits. CATENA 35,
99e121.
Bullock, P., Fedoroff, N., Jongerius, A., Stoops, G.I., Tursina, T., 1985. Handbook for
Soil Thin Section Description. Waine Research Publishers, Wolverhampton.
Courty, M.A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R., 1989. Soils and Micromorphology in
Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Frisia, S., Borsato, A., Fairchild, I.J., McDermott, F., 2000. Calcite fabrics, growth
mechanisms, and environments of formation in speleothems from the Italian
Alps and southwestern Ireland. J. Sediment. Res. 70, 1183e1196.
Haq, B.U., Hardenbol, J., Vail, P.R., 1987. Mesozoic and Cenozoic chronostratigraphy
and cycles of sea-level change. In: Wilgus, C.K., Hastings, B.S., Kendall, C.G.St. C.,
Posamentier, H.W., Ross, C.A., Van Wagoner, J.C. (Eds.), Sea-level Changesdan
Integrated Approach. Spec. Publ. Soc. Econ. Paleont. Miner. vol. 42, 71e108.
Hearty, P.J., Kindler, P., Cheng, H., Edwards, R.L., 1999. A þ20 m middle Pleistocene
sea-level highstand (Bermuda and The Bahamas) due to partial collapse of
Antarctic ice. Geology 27, 375e378.
Hendey, Q.B., 1983. Cenozoic geology and palaeogeography of the fynbos region. In:
Deacon, H.J., Lambrechts, J.J.N. (Eds.), Fynbos Palaeoecology: a Preliminary
Synthesis. S. Afr. Natl. Sci. Progr. Rep. 75, 35e60.
Hendey, Q.B., Volman, T.P., 1986. Last interglacial sea levels and coastal caves in the
Cape Province, South Africa. Quatern. Res. 25, 189e198.
Hill, C., Forti, P., 1997. Cave Minerals of the World, second ed. National Speleological
Society, Huntsville, Alabama.
Horwitz, L.K., Goldberg, P., 1989. A study of Pleistocene and Holocene Hyena
coprolites. J. Archaeol. Sci. 16, 71e94.
Jacobs, Z., 2010. An OSL chronology for the sedimentary deposits from Pinnacle
Point Cave 13B e a punctuated presence. J. Hum. Evol. 59 (3e4), 289e305.
Karkanas, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2000. Diagenesis in prehistoric
caves: the use of minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the
archaeological record. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27, 915e929.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A.,
Gopher, A., Stiner, M., 2007. Evidence for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the
Lower Paleolithic: site formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Hum. Evol.
53, 197e212.
Kendall, A.C., Broughton, P.L., 1978. Origin of fabrics in speleothems composed of
columnar calcite crystals. J. Sediment. Petrol. 48, 519e538.
Lambeck, K., Nakada, M., 1992. Constraints on the age and duration of the last
interglacial period and on sea-level variations. Nature 357, 125e128.
Marean, C.W., Bar-Matthews, M., Fisher, E., Goldberg, P., Herries, A.I.R., Karkanas, P.,
Nilssen, P., Thompson, E., 2010. The stratigraphy of the Middle Stone Age
sediments at Pinnacle Point Cave 13B (Mossel Bay, Western Cape Province,
South Africa). J. Hum. Evol. 59 (3-4), 234e255.
Martini, J.E.J., 2000. Dissolution of quartz and silicate minerals. In: Klimchouk, A.,
Ford, D.C., Palmer, A.N., Dreybrodt, W. (Eds.), Speleogenesis. Evolution of Karst
Aquifers. National Speleological Society, Huntsville, Alabama, pp. 171e174.
Pirazzoli, P.A., 1986. Marine notches. In: van de Plassche, O. (Ed.), Sea-level Research:
a Manual for the Collection and Evaluation of Data. Geo-Books, Norwich, pp. 361e400.
Roberts, D.R., Jacobs, Z., Karkanas, P., Marean, C.W., 2007. Onshore expression of
multiple orbitally driven Late Quaternary marine incursions on the ultra-stable
southern South African coast. Quatern. Intl. 167e168, 345. Abstract.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Weiner, S., 2004. Bat guano and preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31,
1259e1272.
Shackleton, N.J.,1987. Oxygen isotopes, ice volume and sea level. Quatern. Sci. Rev. 6,183e190.
Stoops, G., 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil Regolith Thin
Sections. Soil Science Society of America, Madison, Wisconsin.
Wright, V.P., Tucker, M.E., 1991. Calcretes: an introduction. In: Wright, V.P.,
Tucker, M.E. (Eds.), Calcretes. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 1e22. Reprint Series 2
Volume of the International Association of Sedimentologists.

