Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Soil geochemistry and detection of early Roman precious metal
and copper alloy working at the Roman town of
Calleva Atrebatum (Silchester, Hampshire, UK)
S.R. Cook, A.S. Clarke, M.G. Fulford*
Department of Archaeology, School of Human and Environmental Sciences, University of Reading, PO Box 226,
Reading RG6 6AD, United Kingdom
Received 24 March 2004; received in revised form 22 December 2004

Abstract
A geochemical soil survey was carried out over 500 m2 of a ﬁrst and second century AD house complex in insula IX of the Roman
town of Calleva Atrebatum (Silchester, Hampshire, UK) where there was little prima facie evidence for non-ferrous metalworking.
Preliminary analyses were made by XRF of lead, zinc and copper. These were followed by analysis for Au, Ag and Sn by ICP-MS of
the samples with the highest concentrations of Pb, Zn and Cu. Certain of the Pb, Zn and Cu concentrations suggest the working of
copper alloy including brass, and could be associated with archaeological evidence of hearths and burnt areas of second century AD
date. Other samples have concentrations of the above metals and of gold and silver which do not appear to be associated with any
physical remains of hearths and burnt areas. These concentrations date to the mid-ﬁrst century AD.
Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Early Roman town; Silchester; Metal analyses; Hearths; Geochemistry

1. Introduction
A large-area excavation has been in progress since
1997 to investigate the origins and development of one of
the insulae (city blocks) of the Iron Age and Roman
town of Calleva Atrebatum (Silchester, Hampshire, UK)
[5] (Fig. 1). In the course of renewed research within the
excavation area of a large early Roman house-complex
(House 1) ﬁrst discovered in 1893 (House 1) [10], areas of
burnt soil, probably representing the remains of several
hearths, were identiﬁed in the latest surviving phase of
the northernmost room. Limited soil-material analysis in
1998 of one hearth of probable second century date
yielded evidence of a high calcium content, consistent
with the use of bone in a cupellation furnace, as well as
* Corresponding author. Tel.: C44 118 931 8048; fax: C44 118 987
4062.
E-mail address: m.g.fulford@reading.ac.uk (M.G. Fulford).
0305-4403/$ - see front matter Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2005.01.006

high levels of lead. In addition, panning of a sample of
soil produced a microscopic globule of gold [5, p. 139].
The opportunity for undertaking more extensive
survey of soil-material analysis of successive phases of
House 1 presented itself in 2002e2003. This was
stimulated by the discovery of new concentrations of
burnt soil which suggested the possibility of further
metalworking beyond that identiﬁed in 1998. The
purpose of this study was, therefore, to use soil
geochemical analyses to interrogate the archaeological
evidence particularly with reference to potential metalworking at the site. Notable absences in the area of
House 1 were ﬁnds of the commoner detritus of
Romano-British precious metal and copper alloy
working such as droplets, oﬀ-cuts, slags, crucible or
mould fragments, as have been found previously at
Silchester (cf. [4 (pp. 272e77), 11,13,14]). Previously,
soil analysis has been used to distinguish diﬀerent
functions or land use activities over a site and to aid

806

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

Fig. 1. Outline plan and location of Calleva Atrebatum (Hampshire, UK) with position of insula IX and House 1.

identiﬁcation and interpretation of settlement features
[1e3,9,15].
The metals (copper, zinc, lead, tin, gold and silver)
analysed were chosen on the basis that they would oﬀer
information on possible metalworking at the site.
During the Roman period habitual use was made of
copper as an alloy with lead (Pb) and tin (Sn), with zinc
(Zn) often occurring as an impurity. A variety of copper
alloys were used in the Roman Empire, from traditional
tin bronze to brass and combinations of these alloys,
known by the modern term gunmetal (Cu, Zn and Sn)
[7]. Lead was often added to cast objects to decrease the
melting point of the alloy and facilitate pouring [8]. On
the basis of the earlier ﬁnd of a gold globule, gold (Au)
and silver (Ag) were also chosen in order to determine
whether there was signiﬁcant evidence for the working
of these precious metals in the earlier phases.

2. Methods
2.1. Sampling and the archaeology of House 1
Samples of surface-soil material (a total of 400
samples) were taken on a 1-m grid, from an area of

some 500 m2, from contexts of mid-ﬁrst to mid-third
century AD date throughout the entirety of the large
house-complex (House 1) (Fig. 2). The material was
clay-loam to sandy loam in character, in many cases
with large (of several centimeters in size) ﬂint pebbles.
The ﬂint foundations, which had been interpreted as
a single town house in 1893, can now be seen to
represent the remains of two separate stone-built
houses whose ground plans were subsequently amalgamated to create a single, large property. Indeed, at
the time of sampling the excavation of the ‘house’ was
well advanced to the extent that three major constructional phases had been identiﬁed. In order to
appreciate the signiﬁcance of the geochemical analyses
it is important to understand the archaeological
sequence.
The earliest phase is represented by the beam slots for
one or more timber buildings cut into a gravelly soil.
While the structural evidence for this is currently
clearest at the north-eastern end of the complex, by
2002 contemporary contexts had been exposed throughout its length. Excavation of this phase, which is
provisionally dated to the Claudio-Neronian period, c.
AD 40e60, is incomplete. The majority of the samples
belong to this period.

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

807

Fig. 2. ‘House 1’: showing the three main phases of development and the location of hearths and areas of burning.

In the later ﬁrst century, c. AD 70e80, the timber
building(s) were replaced by two small stone ‘town
houses’ in close proximity to each other on the same,
north-east/south-west orientation. That to the southwest was square in plan with three large rooms,
a corridor and a ‘lobby’ area, while its neighbour
comprised three rooms in a row. These were encapsulated by a corridor on three sides whose outer wall was
of simpler construction than the central rooms. The
nature of the latter’s construction e uncoursed ﬂint
placed in a narrow and shallow construction trench e
suggested that this feature belonged to the third phase
of ‘House 1’ ([5 (pp. 139e40)]; and see below), but there
is no stratigraphic evidence to associate the corridor
more certainly with one phase rather than the other.
Both houses had been damaged by later phases of
activity and only parts of the wall foundations, which
were of coursed ﬂint placed in substantial trenches,
survived. With the exception of a fragment of tessellated
ﬂoor in the central of the three-roomed house, only ﬂoor
make-ups, normally of clay surfaced by gravel, survived.
The one exception was the north-eastern room of the
northerly house whose surviving surfaces and make-up
were predominantly of gravel throughout. At the time of
ﬁrst sampling in 2002, all those make-ups associated with

the three-roomed house and the majority associated with
the square house had been excavated away. Only the
clays associated with the ﬂanking corridor around the
three-room house might be associated with this phase.
Samples were taken from the latter clays and those that
remained at the time of sampling which were associated
with the square house.
The third phase of ‘House 1’ is the most diﬃcult to
interpret. At some point in the second century the
square house was demolished and some of its walls
extensively robbed out. While some of the adjacent
building may have been retained, it certainly lost its
north-eastern room whose walls were largely robbed
out. The lines of the north-east/south-west walls of the
three-roomed structure were extended south-west over
the remains of the earlier town house to link with its rebuilt end wall. The line of the outermost, south-east
facing wall was also continued south-west to the line of
the end wall of the earlier house, but the evidence for
a similar extension of the opposite, outermost wall is less
convincing. It would appear that the plots of both
houses had been utilised to create one large structure
comprising a central space, perhaps retaining two rooms
from the northern house, and ﬂanked by one, perhaps
two aisles. To this phase may belong the sampled clay

808

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

make-ups of the corridor which ﬂanked the northerly
house (see above). If the latter originated with the
construction of the two stone houses, they continued to
be used through the third phase. Otherwise no other
samples which might be attributable to this phase were
taken. The third phase ended no later than the mid-third
century when we have evidence for new property
boundaries, represented by the digging of pits across
the site of ‘House 1’ [5, p. 145].
2.2. Analysis
Each sample was dried and disaggregated before
being passed through a 1 mm sieve. The samples were
then ground and pressed into pellets with a KBr backing
for analysis by X-ray ﬂuorescence (XRF) using a Philips
PW1480 XRF with Philips X40 analytical software.
Analytical quality was determined by running multiple
sub-samples and certiﬁed reference material was used to
check the accuracy of analysis. Background soil samples
which were taken oﬀ site from each of the major local
lithologies (The London Clay, The Bagshot Beds and
the Silchester Plateau Gravels) in order that comparisons with background could be made. Table 1 shows
the average background concentrations compared to
average concentrations for three common rock types.
All the ‘‘hotspot’’ concentrations are above background
values (e.g. average concentrations in background
material are Cu ! 20 ppm, Zn ! 40 ppm and Pb !
45 ppm). Samples for analysis were selected on the basis
that they were adjacent to or directly over burnt areas of
the excavation which may indicate the presence of
hearths. Samples with the highest levels of Cu, Zn and
Pb identiﬁed using XRF were then analysed for gold,
silver and tin using Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometry (ICP-MS) at the NERC ICP-MS Facility,
The University of Kingston, after total acid digestion of
the soil sample using a combination of hydroﬂuoric and
perchloric acids.
Lateral variation in metal concentration across the
site was then plotted using Surfer V6 as contour maps.
Diﬀerent statistical methods were used (kriging, inverse
Table 1
Background concentrations measured in local geological units (Silchester, Hants) compared with average crustal values for sandstone,
shale and carbonate rocks
Sample

Cu

Zn

Pb

Bagshot beds
Silchester gravels
London clay

7.00
18.00
11.00

23.75
39.00
41.67

25.75
43.00
19.33

Crustal averages
Sandstone
Carbonate
Shale

1e10
4.00
50.00

16.00
20.00
90.00

9.00
9.00
20.00

Average compositions taken from Krauskopf and Bird [12].

power to distance, and radial basis functions) and
compared. The results presented in Figs. 3 and 4 were
plotted using the inverse power to distance method,
a simple statistical method which is a variation on
Shepard’s method [16], as this produced the plot with the
least extrapolation between isolated sample sites. Despite
the extrapolation and inherent errors associated with this
method it does provide a clear image of ‘‘hot spot’’
localities across the site and allows us to both focus
subsequent investigations and produce a simple overlay
map which illustrates trends across the excavation.

3. Results and discussion
3.1. X-ray diﬀraction
The concentrations of copper, zinc and lead found in
the samples covered a wide range in values Cu 18e
116 ppm, Zn 28e272 ppm and Pb 25e215 ppm. The
existence of this wide range in values allowed the
identiﬁcation of ‘‘hot spots’’ across the area of House 1.
In each diagram the darkest colours (black) relate to the
highest concentrations of each element. Fig. 3 shows the
variation in metal concentration of lead, copper and zinc
across House 1. It clearly shows the existence of two
‘‘hot spots’’ of lead towards the north-eastern end of
House 1, with a third, lesser concentration close by. The
same ‘‘hot spots’’ are also seen in the zinc and copper
results.
In the case of zinc, the trends seen in its distribution
are similar to those seen for Cu in that both metals exist
at their highest levels in the northwest corner of the
house. The presence of zinc at Silchester, insula IX, may
be a result of the method of brass production during this
period, which was via cementation [6]. This could yield
brass with a maximum zinc content of about 28%. Zinc
is present in 40% of all Roman copper alloys at levels of
at least 5% [7].
The most north-easterly of the combined lead, zinc
and copper ‘hot spots’ coincides with the location of
Hearth 3681 in the aisle of the second period, northern
town house and the third period ‘aisled hall’. This
feature was 0.94 m in diameter with a shallow depth of
0.05 m and a ﬂat base. It was oriented north-east/southwest and produced within it an ash layer which
contained numerous iron nails and some iron-smithing
slags. A layer of charcoal overlay the ash and a redburnt clay layer measuring c. 1.28 m in diameter covered
the entire hearth. Adjacent to this were the trampled and
fragmentary remains of a large Silchester-ware jar. On
the basis of the nails, the slag and the interpretation of
the pottery jar as a quenching vessel, this hearth had
been provisionally interpreted as associated with ironworking [5, p. 139]. In the light of the geochemistry we
can add the working of copper alloys including,

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

Fig. 3. ‘House 1’: the patterns of lead, copper and zinc variation across the site determined by X-ray diﬀraction.

809

810

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

Fig. 4. ‘House 1’: the patterns of silver, gold and tin variation across the site determined by acid digestion and analysis by ICP-MS.

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

probably, brass. Although there is no independent date
for this feature, it is probably to be associated with the
third phase of the house and datable to the second
century, assuming the original ﬂoor surface associated
with the corridor of the Phase 2 town house had been
removed and an open area had been created at the
north-eastern end of the building.
The second hot spot of lead, zinc and copper
combined cannot be associated with a particular archaeological feature suggestive of burning. Although
part of the concentration is located in the area at the end
of ‘House 1’ where the archaeomagnetic dating of the
cupellation hearth (above, p. 1) suggested the presence
of metalworking in the second century, the remainder is
associated with Phase 1 soils of Claudio-Neronian date.
The concentration is likely, therefore, to be of the earlier
date, and the same is true of the nearby lesser lead
concentration in Fig. 3, which also has no archaeological correlate. While these may have resulted from the
sweeping away of metal residues from a nearby hearth,
hitherto unrecognised, it is also possible that worm
action (bioturbation) might have moved metals upwards
from underlying (late Iron Age) contexts. There are two
further, smaller concentrations of copper at the northeastern end of ‘House 1’ (Fig. 2). One of these coincides
with the location of the possible cupellation hearth
proposed as a result of the 1998 analyses by Wojcik
(above, p. 1). This consisted of a cut (1802) 0.61 m wide
and 0.13 m deep with near vertical sides and a ﬂat base.
It was ﬁlled with two burnt deposits of friable yellowishred clayey silt covered by a thin layer of loose, pinkish
white silt. Evidence for possible cupellation included
high concentrations of calcium (around 200! background concentrations). However, there was no litharge
associated with these hearths, possibly as a result of later
clearing or destruction of the hearths. The second
concentration from close by coincides with areas of
burnt clay spreads (2192 and 3203) mixed with charcoal
and ash. Two possible interpretations present themselves: either both of these represent earlier phases of
hearths otherwise associated with the third period of
‘House 1’ and for which, in the case of 1802, we have
independent, archaeomagnetic evidence for a second
century date, or, we are seeing a ‘shadow’ of the late
features as a result of metal residues being carried
downwards by worm or water action. One further, lesser
concentration of copper remains to be noted towards
the south-western corner of ‘House 1’. This certainly
derives from clays associated with the third phase, but
cannot be connected with any hearth structure or area of
burnt soil.
3.2. Gold, silver and tin
Fig. 4 shows the results obtained using acid-digestion
and analysis by ICP-MS for gold, silver and tin. The

811

ranges of these elements found in the samples were Au
3.41e0.67 ppm, Sn 90.12e7.92 ppm and Ag 6.97e
2.54 ppm. The patterns observed for Sn are similar to
those observed for Pb and Cu. Both show highest
concentrations in the aisled area of ‘House 1’ in the top
corner of the diagrams and this correlates with Hearth
3681 described above (p. 4). This is perhaps not
surprising as tin is found frequently in Roman alloys
(54% of alloys have more than 5% tin) [7].
Silver is chemically similar to lead and may be
expected to occur with lead in ores. However, the
highest concentration, though at the north-eastern end
of ‘House 1’, is in a slightly diﬀerent location from any
of the lead. Gold is an inert metal, which is often
diﬃcult to detect in environmental samples owing to its
occurrence as discrete ‘‘nuggets’’ which are easily missed
when taking bulk soil samples. However it is likely that,
were the workers using gold, the ‘‘spatter’’ from any
melt pouring or working process would have led to
a wide distribution of gold particles across the ﬂoor of
the workshop. Although the concentrations of Au found
in these samples are relatively low (typically 2e3 ppm
with a maximum in one sample of 3.4 ppm), the highest
concentrations are found in the samples taken from one
area at the north-eastern end of ‘House 1’ and close to
both the silver concentration and one of the lead, zinc,
copper concentrations (above). As with the latter,
neither the gold or silver concentration has an archaeological correlate in the form of a hearth or burnt area.
Given the stratigraphic context we would propose that,
as suggested above, these gold and silver concentrations
are more likely to relate to activity of mid-ﬁrst century
AD (or earlier) date.

4. Conclusion
The soil geochemistry provides evidence for the
working of gold and silver and copper alloys, including
brass, in association with ‘House 1’ of insula IX,
Silchester. It is possible that lead and copper were also
worked independently. The excavation of the area
produced no other material evidence for the working
of this range of metals. We suggest that the working of
the gold and silver and the copper alloys for which there
is, coincidentally, no archaeological correlate in the
form of a hearth or an area of burnt soil may date to the
ﬁrst phase of ‘House 1’ and the mid-ﬁrst century AD. In
contrast those concentrations of lead, zinc, copper and
tin for which there is physical evidence of hearths or
burnt soil can be associated with the third phase (‘work
hall’) of the house dating to the second century AD.
Interestingly, these represent the ﬁrst in situ evidence for
non-ferrous metalworking from Silchester (cf. [4 (pp.
272e77)]). In terms of the variety of metals being
worked, it may also be noted that, on the basis of the

812

S.R. Cook et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005) 805e812

artefacts and slag found, one of the hearths of this phase
(3681) was also interpreted as for iron-working.
The metal concentrations for which there is no
archaeological correlate raise important questions about
the mobility in the soil of microscopic metal residues.
It will be important to continue this programme of
analysis to the conclusion of the excavation in order
to determine whether concentrations continue to be
apparent in the same locations at lower stratigraphic
levels, and to assess the vertical variation in metal
concentrations. Equally, this paper draws attention to
the need to analyse routinely hearths and burnt soils
where there is no obvious prima facie evidence for
metalworking.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Professor J.R.L. Allen,
(Dept of Archaeology, School of Human and Environmental Sciences, University of Reading) and Dr Kym
Jarvis (NERC ICP-MS Facility, Kingston) for their
advice and help throughout the project. We owe a debt
of gratitude to Dr Adam Wojcik (UCL), whose initial
discovery in 1998 helped to stimulate this research.
References
[1] M. Aston, C. Gerrard, ‘Unique, traditional and charming’ The
Shapwick Project, Somerset, Antiquaries Journal 79 (1999) 1e58.
[2] M. Aston, M.H. Martin, A.W. Jackson, The use of heavy metal
soil analysis for archaeological surveying, Chemosphere 37 (1998)
465e477.
[3] M. Aston, M.H. Martin, A.W. Jackson, The potential for heavy
metal soil analysis on low status archaeological sites at Shapwick,
Somerset, Antiquity 72 (1998) 838e847.

[4] G.C. Boon, Silchester: The Roman Town of Calleva, David &
Charles, Newton Abbott, 1974.
[5] A. Clarke, M. Fulford, The excavation of Insula IX, Silchester:
the ﬁrst ﬁve years of the ‘Town Life’ Project, 1997e2001,
Britannia 33 (2002) 129e166.
[6] P. Craddock, The composition of copper alloys used by the
Greek, Etruscan and Roman civilisations, 3, The origins and early
use of brass, Journal of Archaeological Science 5 (1978) 1e16.
[7] D. Dungworth, Roman copper alloys: analysis of artifacts from
Northern Britain, Journal of Archaeological Science 24 (1997)
901e910.
[8] D. Dungworth, Iron-age and Roman copper alloys from northern
Britain, Internet Archaeology 2 (1997). http://intarch.ac.uk/
journal/issue2/dungworth_toc.html.
[9] J.A. Entwistle, P.W. Abrahams, R.A. Dodgshon, The geoarchaeological signiﬁcance and spatial variability of a range of
physical and chemical soil properties from a former habitation
site, Isle of Skye, Journal of Archaeological Science 27 (4) (2000)
287e303.
[10] G.E. Fox, Excavations on the site of the Roman City at Silchester,
Hants, in 1894, Archaeologia 54 (2) (1895) 439e494.
[11] W. Gowland, Remains of a Roman silver reﬁnery at Silchester,
Archaeologia 57 (pt 1) (1900) 113e124.
[12] K.B. Krauskopf, D.K. Bird, Introduction to geochemistry, third
ed., McGraw-Hill International Editions, 1995.
[13] P. Northover, N. Palk, Metallurgical debris: catalogue and
analysis, in: M. Fulford, J. Timby (Eds.), Late Iron Age and
Roman Silchester, Excavations on the Site of the Forum Basilica
1977, 1980e86, Britannia Monograph 15, Society for the
Promotion of Roman Studies, London, 2000, pp. 395e420.
[14] D. Richards, Iron-working and other miscellaneous metalworking residues, in: M. Fulford, J. Timby (Eds.), Late Iron
Age and Roman Silchester, Excavations on the Site of the Forum
Basilica 1977, 1980e86, Britannia Monograph 15, Society for the
Promotion of Roman Studies, London, 2000, pp. 421e422.
[15] S.J. Rippon, The use of soil analysis in the interpretation of
an early historic landscape at Puxton in Somerset, Landscape
History 23 (2001) 27e38.
[16] D. Shepard, A two-dimensional interpolation function for
irregularly-spaced data, Proceedings of the 23rd National
Conference ACM. Association of Computing Machinery, 1968,
pp. 517e524.

