Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433
http://france.elsevier.com/direct/CULHER/

Case study

Importance of digital close-range photogrammetry in
documentation of cultural heritage
H.M. Yilmaz a,*, M. Yakar b, S.A. Gulec c, O.N. Dulgerler c
a

Department of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, Engineering Faculty, Aksaray University, 68100 Aksaray, Turkey
b
Department of Geodesy and Photogammetry, Engineering Faculty, Selçuk University, 42120 Konya, Turkey
c
Department of Architecture, Engineering Faculty, Selçuk University, 42120 Konya, Turkey
Received 16 November 2006; accepted 5 July 2007

Abstract
It is an indisputable reality that the most important thing for transmitting cultural heritage to posterity is a sensitive documentation. Up to the
present there have been many developments in documentation of cultural heritage by developing technology, and contemporary documentation
techniques have progressed speedily. In time, modern methods have become preferable to conventional methods in architecture generally in the
existent state and in determination of deformations and preparation of measured drawing projects of historical edifices. Digital and 3D data, rich
visual images obtained by digital close-range photogrammetry, and orthophoto images of edifices, are governed and shepherded in documentation and future conservation projects. Also, these methods supply much ease, precision and time-saving in measured drawing projects
when compared with conventional methods. In this study, contributions of digital close-range photogrammetry to measured drawing projects
were evaluated. A historical building, which had been exposed to fire two times in Konya (Turkey), was photographed and its situation before
and after the fire was demonstrated. In addition, the building’s measured drawings of facade and its 3D model were completed using digital
close-range photogrammetry. The building’s present status and its reconstruction project is indicated and how digital close-range photogrammetry contributes to measured drawing, reconstruction and restoration projects is presented. Furthermore, the significance of present-day use of
digital close-range photogrammetry in the acquisition of data and preparation of measured drawing projects for historical buildings is emphasized. This study has been completed by photogrammetrists, architects, urban planners and restorers.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Photogrammetry; Documentation; Historical buildings; Cultural Heritage; Conservation

1. Introduction
Monuments are undeniable documents of world history.
Their thorough study is an obligation of our era to mankind’s
past and future [1,2]. Conservation of cultural heritage is
a major issue for modern societies, both from economical
and cultural viewpoints. Culture and heritage play a vital
role in the development of the individual and the collective
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ90 382 215 0341; Fax: þ90 382 215 0592.
E-mail addresses: hmyilmaz@nigde.edu.tr (H.M. Yilmaz), yakar@selcuk.
edu.tr (M. Yakar), agulec@selcuk.edu.tr (S.A. Gulec), dulgerler@selcuk.edu.tr
(O.N. Dulgerler).
1296-2074/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.culher.2007.07.004

development of a people. In addition to providing cultural,
aesthetic and spiritual satisfaction, culture and heritage are
of interest in terms of economics [3,4].
Historic structures and sites reveal the events, the problems,
and the progress of the past. They present an opportunity to
visualize the lives of the people before us. But every year
some of these historic structures disappear, lost to future generations due to the ravages of fire [5]. Computerized methods
and close-range photogrammetry are proposed as a preventive
method which allows us to detect, measure and track the temporal evolution of some structural problems [6].
In the past few years, image analysis has grown more and
more important for applications that concern study, modelling

H.M. Yilmaz et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433

and preservation of cultural heritage [7]. They present better
volumetric perception of an edifice and its surroundings and
also give more details about the description of materials constituting the historic monuments and sites.
In this study, the significance of documentation for architectures and the role of digital close-range photogrammetry
in transmitting cultural heritage to the next generations, and
the place of digital close-range photogrammetry in the authentication of historical edifices are emphasized. Also, for the
architect, the aim of documentation and the use of digital
close-range photogrammetry in architecture is explained. In
addition, documentation of a particular building, which was
exposed to fire two times in Konya, by digital close-range photogrammetry and its current reuse planned by its reconstruction project, is demonstrated.

2. Documenting cultural heritage
The view of cultural heritage is closely consistent with that
of UNESCO, enunciated in the 1972 Convention for the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage [1,8,9].
UNESCO (1946) and the Council of Europe have formed
specialized organizations for conservation of cultural heritages. ICOMOS (International Council for Monuments and
Sites) is the most important one, but also CIPA (International Committee for Architectural Photogrammetry), ISPRS
(International Society for Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing), ICOM (International Council for Museums), ICCROM
(International Centre for the Conservation and Restoration
of Monuments) and UIA (International Union of Architects)
are all involved in conservation task of cultural heritages
[1].
Documentation is a complex process that includes stages of
data acquisition, interpretation, and production. It is the first
and most important step before starting to conserve projects
and works. A short definition of it is the recording of the existent state and surroundings of the building by reports, drawings and photographs.
During the documentation and recording, knowledge about
the building can be capitalized upon using old photographs, old
maps, old drawings and projects, civil and personal archives,
pictures and gravures, archaeological data and travel notes.
For documentation of an important historical building in the
field of architecture, it must be worth preserving. For this,
the building must have the features like the following.
 To testify to a historical event in the past
 To have the original and characteristic quality (authenticity)
 To have worth of continuity (maintain its original function
today)
 To have a legitimate documentation from the past
 To be unique from the technical or structural point
of view
 To have artistic or technical worth
 To have functional worth
 To have traditional worth

429

2.1. Importance of documentation and photogrammetry
in cultural heritage
Very important knowledge regarding life style, space requirements and solutions, building policies, social relations,
economic levels, the level of the building technique, level of
technology, art perceptiveness, building equilibria, and alterations in social life of the past generations can be acquired
from historical buildings.
Documentation is necessary for:
 Transmitting cultural heritage to next generation
 Making the building alive by using it in contemporary
manner
 Obtaining correct data for future plans
 Determination of the problems in historical building and in
historical site or monument
 Acquisition of knowledge about the history of the building
Before embarking on any intervention, the restorer must
reach a deep and complete knowledge of cultural property,
the existing situation before the restoration in order to determine problems in the building’s structural system, decays in
materials, deformations, distortions, and interventions, evaluation of damage, the analysis of the fissures, determining anomalies besides the history of construction [10].
National and international studies connected with digital
close-range photogrammetry that have already been made
have enhanced its reputation and also have expanded its usage
fields in architecture.
Digital close-range photogrammetry is used in:
 determining of historical and archaeological value of the
building,
 defining and obtaining measured drawing and facades of
the building,
 in preparation and application of urban conservation plans,
 modality and structure research,
 interior designs,
 determining deformation, evaluation of damage, analysis
of the decay, deformation and anomalies, and fissuring,
 controlling the situation of the building before and after
restoration,
 making a building numerical by determining coordinates
in architecture [11].
The most widespread usage of photogrammetry has been
for the representation of the facades or elevations of historic
buildings and structure. By improving digital techniques, digital close-range photogrammetry has become a more efficient
and more economic method. Obtained 3D solid or textured
images help us to understand sophisticated and complex buildings more easily [12].
In some situations, two-dimensional drawings may be inadequate in order to understand the building and its surroundings, but visual presentations prepared by digital close-range
photogrammetry and arrangements in CAD programs make

430

H.M. Yilmaz et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433

the model more explanatory and more supportive of the building’s situation. These studies are a great help to architects.
One of the most important advantages of using digital
close-range photogrammetry to supply documentation is in
measuring dangerous or inaccessible areas, very high or low
buildings, or part of these buildings. It is a major aid in obtaining the required measurement of the parts of the building from
the photograph. Regarding documentation, these data can be
used again in the future, can be shared with other users, and
are easy to store on computer [6,13e16].
3. Documenting techniques in cultural heritage
The documentation of a cultural heritage may be defined
as [9]: The action of acquiring, processing, presenting and recording the necessary data for the determination of the position and the actual existing form, shape and size of
a monument in the three-dimensional space at a particular
given moment in time. The geometric documentation records
the present situation of the monuments, as has been shaped
in the course of time and is the necessary background for
the studies of their past, as well as the studies for their
future.
Today in documentation of cultural heritages the following
methods are applied:
 Simple topometric methods for partially or totally uncontrolled surveys
 Surveying and photogrammetric methods for completely
controlled surveys
In architecture making a physical definition of a building
starts with measured drawing studies and photographic documentation, and continues with an analytical survey. Analytical
survey is not only measuring but also aims to assign the building’s constitution, and its alteration and conversion process
[17].
Measured drawing works to measure and state the layout,
cross-section and all details of the building and to state these
in two-dimensional architectural terms. What is important here
is the existent situation of the building and if there are additions or deficiencies that must be defined in all of these
drawings.
Photographic documentation records the present position of
the building by photographs. Digital photography as analytical
technology is advantageous because it shares the digital technology attributes of automation and provides time economy.
Photography has a long and significant role in historic documentation [18].

Fig. 1. The central perspective projection.

projection. The primary coordinate system is positioned
arbitrarily in object space; while the secondary system has
its origin at the perspective camera center O, its z-axis coincides with the principal axis and is directed away from the
projection (image) plane (Fig. 1). The scale factor is set to
unity.
In the primary system we have the coordinates of the perspective center, O, and an object point in space, A:
(X0,Y0,Z0) and (XA,YA,ZA), respectively. The projection of A,
through O, in the image plane, expressed in the secondary system, gives the coordinates of point a: (xa,ya,c), where c is the
principal distance (sometimes called effective focal length),
between O and the principal point, PP. Points A and a are
called homologous. Thus, we have: XA ¼ X0 þ (m)Rtxa,
where m is a positive scalar quantity proportional to the object
distance from A to O.

3.1. Mathematical basics of digital
close-range photogrammetry
Digital close-range photogrammetry measures objects directly from photographs or digital images captured with
a camera at close range [12,19]. The basic model in digital
close-range photogrammetry is the central perspective

Fig. 2. The original situation of the building.

H.M. Yilmaz et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433

431

Fig. 3. The situations of the building after the first and second fire.

The reverse transform is then given as
2
32
3
3
g11 g21 g31
XA  X0
xa
4 ya 5 ¼ m1 4 g12 g22 g32 5 4 YA  Y0 5
c
g13 g23 g33
ZA  Z0

4. Case study

2

ð1Þ

Note that the vectors (XA  X0), xa are collinear but of opposite sense.
The 3rd equation of the reverse transform above can be
written explicitly in terms of the scaling m and substituted in
the other two equations, leading to the collinearity equations:
xa ¼

c½g11 ðX0  XA Þ þ g12 ðY0  YA Þ þ g13 ðZ0  ZA Þ
½g31 ðX0  XA Þ þ g32 ðY0  YA Þ þ g33 ðZ0  ZA Þ

c½g21 ðX0  XA Þ þ g22 ðY0  YA Þ þ g23 ðZ0  ZA Þ
ya ¼
½g31 ðX0  XA Þ þ g32 ðY0  YA Þ þ g33 ðZ0  ZA Þ

Fig. 4. Control points on photograph.

ð2Þ

The building is located on Konya (Figs. 2e8). It was built
in the 18th century and has two storeys. Accidentally, this
study has begun to teach photogrammetric methods to engineering faculty students. A historical building has been selected to evaluate photogrammetric procedures. For this
purpose, photographs have been taken and control points
have been surveyed according to photogrammetric evaluation
techniques. However, about one year later the historical building was burnt down two times. A restoration project by the
conservation office of Turkey has been needed to reconstruct
the historical building. There were no drawings, measurements
or other documentation with which to start restoration projects
except for students’ studies. It was obligatory that a restoration
project be started by the photogrammetrists to determine the

Fig. 5. Drawing of the facade by digital close-range photogrammetry.

432

H.M. Yilmaz et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433

Fig. 6. Drawing of the 3D model by digital close-range photogrammetry.

original status and measurements of building. After the second
fire, it was measured again to determine the changes and latest
conditions of the building. Photomodeler software was used
for the photogrammetric process.
After the processing, drawings were obtained in Photomodeler software. All measurements and drawings were exported
to dxf format for the architects. These drawings helped to prepare the reconstruction project of this building. After the measured drawing projects, a reconstruction project for the
building was drawn in Autocad and was also rendered. Digital
close-range photogrammetry was considerably useful for analyzing material decay and determining the deformations on the
oriels. The reconstruction project was drawn by expert architects. A three-dimensional project model was rendered. Its
construction works were completed according to the original
measurements. The building is now functional once again
and is used as a company office building.

Fig. 8. The reconstructed situation of the building.

5. Conclusions
Cultural heritage protection is a key matter today worldwide. There has been an increase in public awareness over recent years that these kinds of monuments constitute an
important part of our past. There are innumerable cultural heritage sites all over the world. Preservation and documentation
of these is an important matter.
It is obvious that using digital close-range photogrammetry
has many advantages in the documentation and conservation
of cultural heritage. Using a 3D model in order to compare
the building’s situation before and after restoration and analysis
of alterations in the constitution of the building’s interventions
up to date is a very significant input for both architects and
restorers. In transmitting the cultural heritage to the next generations the preparation of measured drawing, restitution, a reconstruction project and the place and the sensitivity of the
documentation is considerably important. Correct documentation is necessary not only for posterity but also in functionality
in contemporary usage and re-evaluation of the historical
buildings.
Photogrammetry uses only photographs and mathematical
equations. These are important in view of correct and accurate
measurement of cultural heritage. In addition, it is possible to
evaluate the situation after the restoration. Photogrammetry
has much more superiority over traditional methods in restoration projects. Dangerous and unreachable buildings, like the
one mentioned here destroyed by fire, can be accurately measured by Photogrammetric methods easily and safely.
References

Fig. 7. Rendered model of the building.

[1] A. Georgopoulos, C. Ioannidis, Photogrammetric and Surveying
Methods for the Geometric Recording of Archaeological Monuments,

H.M. Yilmaz et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 8 (2007) 428e433

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

Archaeological Surveys, FIG Working Week, May 22e27 2004, Athens,
Greece, 2004, http://www.fig.net/pub/athens/papers/wsa1/WSA1_1_
Georgopoulos_Ioannidis.pdf.
S.D.S. Salazar, J.M. Marques, Valuing cultural heritage: the social benefits of restoring and old Arab tower, Journal of Cultural Heritage 6 (2005)
69e77.
A. Bedate, L.C. Herrero, J.A. Sanz, Economic valuation of the cultural
heritage: application to four case studies in Spain, Journal of Cultural
Heritage 5 (2004) 101e111.
E.R. Harvey, Polı́tica Cultural en Argentina, Unesco, Paris, 1997.
N. Akinciturk, M. Kilic, A study on the fire protection of historic Cumalikizik village, Journal of Cultural Heritage 5 (2004) 213e219.
P. Arias, J. Herraez, H. Lorenzo, C. Ordonez, Control of structural problems in cultural heritage monuments using close-range photogrammetry
and computer methods, Computers and Structures 83 (2005) 1754e1766.
F. Pedersini, A. Sarti, S. Tubaro, Automatic monitoring and 3D reconstruction applied to cultural heritage, Journal of Cultural Heritage
(2000) 301e313.
F. Callegari, Sustainable development prospects for Italian coastal cultural
heritage: a Ligurian case study, Journal of Cultural Heritage 4 (2003) 49e56.
http://www.unesco.org/whc/world_he.htm.
R.A. Genovese, Architectural Archeological and Environmental Restoration Planning Methodology. CIPA 2005 XX International Symposium,
26 Sep.e01 Oct., Torino, Italy, 2005, http://cipa.icomos.org/fileadmin/
papers/Torino2005/295.pdf.

433

[11] H.M. Yilmaz, H. Karabork, M. Yakar, Yersel Fotogrametrinin Kullanım
Alanları, Niğde Üniversitesi Mühendislik Bilimleri Dergisi 4 (1) (2000)
18e28.
[12] K.B. Atkinson, Close-range Photogrammetry and Machine Vision,
Whittles Publishing, Scotland, 1996.
[13] E. Berndt, J. Carlos, Cultural heritage in the mature era of computer
graphics, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 20 (1) (2000)
36e37.
[14] L.G. Desmond, P. Collins, T.G. Negron, J. Callaghan, Gateway into the
past: Photogrammetric documentation of the Arch, Labna, Yucatan,
Mexico, in: L.P. Barba (Ed.), Antropologia y Técnica 7 (IIA) (2003)
55e66.
[15] G. Guidi, A. Beraldin, C. Atzeni, High-accuracy 3-D modeling of cultural heritage: the digitizing of Donatello’s ‘‘Maddalena’’ image, Proc.
IEEE Trans. On 13 (3) (2004) 370e380.
[16] M. Pieraccini, G. Guidi, C. Atzeni, 3D digitizing of cultural heritage,
Journal of Cultural Heritage 2 (2001) 63e70.
[17] D. Kuban, Tarihi Çevre Korumanın Mimarlık Boyutu (Kuram ve Uygulama), Istanbul, 2000.
[18] R. Warden, D. Woodcock, Historic documentation: a model of project
based learning for architectural education, Landscape and Urban Planning 73 (2005) 110e119.
[19] M. Turan, Mimari Fotogrametri Alanındaki Çağdas
x Gelis
ximlerin
Değerlendirilmesi, Gazi Ünviversitesi Mühendislik Mimarlık Fakültesi
Dergisi (2004) 43e50.

