Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Deciphering bone depositional sequences in caves through
the study of manganese coatings
Fernando López-González, Aurora Grandal-d’Anglade*, Juan Ramón Vidal-Romanı́
Instituto Universitario de Xeoloxı́a ‘‘Isidro Parga Pondal’’, University of A Coruña, Campus de Elviña, s/n. 15071 A Coruña, Spain
Received 14 February 2005; received in revised form 25 July 2005; accepted 11 October 2005

Abstract
The presence of black-coloured bones in caves has been sometimes associated to the use of fire by humans, but more frequently the agent
responsible for black colour is the natural deposition of manganese oxides. Manganese coatings were not usually studied once human action was
discarded. However, they can provide valuable information about the origin and the sequence of formation of a palaeontological or archaeological deposit. In this paper, we present a quantitative and qualitative study of the manganese coatings that affect most of the bones recovered in the
palaeontological site of Liñares cave (NW of Iberian Peninsula) together with other taphonomic marks. The manganese coatings are superimposed on other features previously existing on the surface of the bones. In turn, the coatings can be affected by other agents that modified them
totally or partially. The combined interpretation of the different taphonomic marks provides us with valuable information on the sequence where
the different taphonomic processes were produced, as for example the intervention of carnivores in the disarticulation of some elements before
the burial, the preservation of anatomic connections until after the burial of the carcasses, and the existence of reworking processes in some parts
of the infill.
Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Black bones; Manganese coatings; X-ray diffraction; Depositional sequence; Taphonomy; Liñares cave

1. Introduction
1.1. Metallic coatings in caves
Mentioning the presence of black-coloured bones in caves
in archaeological or palaeontological studies is becoming
more and more frequent. These coloured bones have been frequently described as a result of burning and were associated to
human activities such as the use of fire and exhaustively studied from this perspective [1,2,4e6,8,14,22,30,31,33,35,37,39].
Nevertheless, there are many agents apart from fire that can
explain the presence of black or dark coatings on bones, such
as the presence of carbonaceous material (soot from torches,
lanterns and guano fires; humate; tar; coal-derived organic
material and surface vegetation-derived material), and guano

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 981 167000; fax: þ34 981 167065.
E-mail address: xeaurora@udc.es (A. Grandal-d’Anglade).
0305-4403/$ - see front matter Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2005.10.006

from bats and rats [13,32]. But, undoubtedly, manganese
oxides are the most common colouring agents in caves [13].
Bones coloured black by manganese coatings are not usually
studied once human action has been discarded. However,
they can provide valuable information about the origin and
the sequence of formation of a palaeontological or archaeological deposit.
Potter and Rossman [27] consider that the concentrations of
oxides of Mn are a common product of the terrestrial erosive
processes and occur in diverse environments throughout the
world, including caves. In fact, the existence of these coatings
has already been mentioned in diverse North American karstic
cavities for 30 years [38].
For the mineralogical identification of the oxides of
manganese that form these black-coloured coverings, one has
frequently resorted to X-ray diffraction, even though the
interpretation of the results is difficult owing to the extremely
thin and disorderly nature of the particles that form these
coverings [21,27,29,38]. Subsequently, other higher-precision

708

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

techniques have been utilised, such as infrared spectroscopy
[27] and, more recently, X-ray absorption spectroscopy [20].
Finally, it is proper to mention that the mineral of which
these black-coloured coverings in caves are most often made
is birnessite [(Na, Ca, K) Mn7O14$3H2O] [21,27] or birnessite-like minerals and todorokite [20].
The origin of manganese coatings is a result of the action of
diverse species of manganese-oxidising bacteria [21,23,25,38],
which in some cases were isolated and identified in the laboratory [21,25].

1.2. Presence of coatings in Liñares
The site of Liñares is located southeast of the province of
Lugo (NW of the Iberian Peninsula) at 1110 m above sea level
(Fig. 1). The area where the site is located belongs to the
northern slope of the Serra do Courel. Morphologically, this
is formed by a mountainous crest with NE alignment, with exposures of strongly fractured and faulted slate, quartzite and
limestone. The topography is characterised by an uneven relief
with heights not higher than 1700 m.
The Liñares cave is located in the Vegadeo Limestones,
with alternating slates, dolomites, calcoschists and limestones,
which contain an abundant fossil record of the Lower-Middle
Cambrian Age [40,41].
The Liñares cave is relatively small, about 90 m in total
length (Fig. 2). It has an NWeSE trend, following the same
direction as the Cambrian formations in which it is formed.
The main gallery is the highest level of a much larger system
of galleries that gains depth towards the SW, following the
stratification planes of rocky formations [19].

The cave has three entrances in the rocky massif with an
access to the main gallery about 60 m in length and a development in rectilinear plan. Its profile goes down into the interior
showing a smooth slope, reaching a low ground of 18 m with
regard to the entrance at the end. Approximately 45 m from
the entrance there is a narrow hole where the palaeontological
site is currently located (Fig. 2). This hole connects the main
gallery with the lower levels of the karstic system [19].
The presence of big fallen blocks and the cracking of speleothems (flowstones, stalagmitic columns, etc.) confirm the
existence of catastrophic events in the past.
An important characteristic of Liñares site lies in the excellent preservation of the fossil sample found therein, with a single preservation state in which most of the pieces are little
affected by post-depositional destructive agents; being very
complete, little fractured and consistent in most of the cases
[19]. The presence of paired elements of the skeleton, complete anatomic units and also the preservation of anatomic
connections to date indicates the accumulation of complete
carcasses with scarce dispersion and no transport in some
points of the infill. On the contrary, in other points the bones
are not anatomically connected, suggesting they have suffered
lateral transport although along a short distance (they are not
rounded) and also suggesting the existence of processes of reworking by water circulation in the past. Because of all the
above-mentioned facts, the interpretation of the deposition sequence becomes difficult.
The number of remains recovered in Liñares was 1295, and
its excellent preservation condition favoured the determination
of most of them to a specific level (92.7% of the bone remains). Red deer (most of them adult males) and cave bears
(most of them females) together account for 90.9% of the

Heights:
< 800 m

IA
LIC
A
G

Liñares

800-1,000 m
1,000-1,200 m
1,200-1,400 m
> 1,400 m

er

R

LO

Riv

Seoane
do Courel
Faro
1,606 m

Capeloso
1,597 m

Formigueiros
1,636 m

Fig. 1. Geographic map showing location of Liñares cave (NW of Iberian Peninsula).

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

709

dry and practically black when wet. Some of them are equally
black both dry and wet [17,19].
From the outset it was supposed that the black deposits that
coat most of the bone sample were a metallic deposition of the surface. Some bones could seem to be smoked bones because of their
black colour, but the absence of the typical surface modifications
produced by incineration, like splitting, warping, fracturing, exfoliations, etc. [3,5,6,36], suggests the first option to us.

Entrance

2. Materials and methods

a'

Talus slope

section aa'
Hole

a

Hole

Fig. 2. Ground plan of Liñares cave and cross-section of the hole (aea#) at the
excavation point.

studied sample. The presence of other taxa (horse, large bovid,
wild boar, and roe deer) is merely testimonial (23 remains, being 1.8% of the total) [19].
The analysis of the bone sample of Liñares shows that it
forms a natural taphonomic association. If cave bears are frequent in Pleistocene caves between 40  and 52  N in Europe
[16,28], red deer are not frequent in natural non-anthropic deposits. However, previous studies discarded the hunting activity of the prehistoric man and/or scavengers as the primary
origin of the accumulation of the bone assemblage [18,19].
This was confirmed by the absence of characteristic marks
and the comparison of the differential preservation of the remains with each type of accumulation source. The accumulation of such number of male red deer was interpreted as
looking for shelter in one or several specific episodes [18,19].
The dating carried out in Liñares varies between 35 and
>38 ky BP, which is the limit of the dating method. However,
there are no clues suggesting that the age of the remains beyond this date may really be much higher [12,19]. This dating
does not necessarily imply that they died at the same time but
both bears and deer could have been contemporary.
One of the most remarkable taphonomic features of the fossil assemblage of Liñares is the intense dark shade of most of
the recovered remains. The general aspect obtained at first
glance is of some dark dun or dark bluish grey bones when

Of the 1295 remains from Liñares, 1226, 94.7% of the sample, show a superficial coating. Colours vary from light grey to
dark dun, even deep black. For the taphonomic interpretation
about the presence of black coatings on bone surface, two aspects were considered: on one hand, the coating intensity and,
on the other, the area affected by the deposit whatever its intensity. Table 1 shows the categories used, graphically represented at the same time in Fig. 3.
Those cases in which the coatings appear on the bone surface as spots of well-defined limits were also recorded. Also, it
was considered whether the articular surfaces of each piece
show coatings or not. In some cases the deposition formed
a consistent and stable layer; however, in others, it was a loose
coating that dirtied one’s fingers when handling the sample.
Besides the classification of the entire sample, two bones
showing a very high coating grade and representative of
each type of coating found in the sample were selected in order
to conduct further geo-chemical studies. The pieces selected
are the following:
Sample 1 Fragment of flat bone belonging to the scapula
of a deer, with intense coating (intensity 2) all
over its surface. The bone surface is smooth
and does not dirty one’s fingers when touched.
The edge of the fracture is also with the coating
(therefore, it is not a recent break).
Sample 2 Fragment of right antler of an adult deer. Most
of the bone surface is coated with a dusty substance of intense dark colour (intensity 3) that
dirties one’s fingers when touched. Even though
the antler was complete in the site, it was not
Table 1
Categories used to classify the intensity and the area covered by the manganese coatings
Intensity of the coating
0 Lack of coating. Yellowish clear colours
1 Little affected remains in brownish shades
2 Uniform in greyish or dark dun shades
3 Intensive uniform coating of black colour
Affected area
0 No coating
1 Little affected surface (<10%)
2 Between 10% and 50%
3 Between 50% and 90%
4 Between 90% and 100%

710

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

Fig. 3. Examples of each class of intensity of manganese coatings on cave bear metapodials, as described in Table 1, in increasing order from left to right (scale bar
is 3 cm).

possible to extract it intact given the fragility
that it showed in humid state. In this case the recent fractures are white, strongly contrasting
with the dark coating of the surface.
The surface of both samples was photographed with an
electronic scanning microscope, in order to observe in detail
the different patterns of coating already observed by the naked
eye. All the photographs were made at the Servicios Xerais de
Apoio á Investigación of the University of A Coruña, with
a JEOL JSM-6400 electronic scanning microscope.
Analyses of X-ray diffraction were carried out on the previously selected samples. This qualitative method provides
us with a relationship of the elements forming the metallic deposition. We used the X-ray diffraction because it is a very
simple technique available in our laboratory, and because we
did not want to do an identification of the mineral responsible
for the coatings but only a confirmation that they were superficial deposits mainly composed of oxides of Mn and Fe. Both
the scapula fragment and the antler one were analysed on the
surface and in section, four samples in total, repeating the
analysis from two to four times by sample.
Besides the quantitative and qualitative study of the coatings,
other features more frequently taken into account in classical
taphonomic works were studied, such as carnivores’ or micromammals’ marks. The scavengers’ action was extensively studied
elsewhere [19] and included data on intensity and action patterns.

(81.9%) are intensively coated by manganese deposits (classes
2 and 3), 12.7% with little coating and only 5.3% are not coated;
78.5% of the bones are coated on their whole surface. Of
these, 94.8% show a coating of intensities 1 and 2. These uniform coatings were considered as primary coatings. Primary
coatings presumably affect the bones also in depth as it can
be observed in a rib (Fig. 4). In this bone the coating progressed radially from the surface towards the inner part, and
from the sediment-filled medullar cavity towards the surface.
The manganese coatings of maximum intensity appear in
a lower proportion (9.2%). They consist of dusty depositions
similar to those observed by X-ray diffraction in sample 2,
and they frequently cover other coatings of less intensity. This
helps us to suppose that these coatings are due to a secondary deposition, of more recent formation than the others. In some cases
these secondary depositions also coat dental pieces and articular
surfaces that were not affected by initial or primary coatings
(Fig. 5). More exactly, the secondary deposition affects 20%
of the bones with articular surfaces free from primary coatings.
3.2. Lack of coatings on articular surfaces and muscular
insertions
We detected 225 cases (17.4%) in which the articular surfaces show no manganese coatings (Fig. 6) or are affected
Table 2
Classification of the bone sample of Liñares according to the intensity grade of
the manganese coatings along with the area affected by the metallic deposition

3. Results

Affected area

Intensity of the coating
0

1

2

3.1. Intensity and covering of the coatings on the total
bone sample

0
1
2
3
4

69
0
0
0
0

0
15
15
21
114

0
21
22
49
850

0
9
17
40
53

69
45
54
110
1017

Total

69

165

942

119

1295

The number of remains according to each intensity grade of
the metallic deposition along with the area affected by the metallic deposition are shown in Table 2. Most of the bones

Total
3

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

711

inserted; they show no metallic deposits affecting the rest
of the piece or with lower intensity (Fig. 6). In total, there
are 21 bones with this feature.
3.3. Manganese masks
In 157 bones (12.1%) coatings of manganese oxides forming more or less large spots were observed on the bone surface, which we called masks (Fig. 7).Of them 101 bones
correspond to spots of maximum intensity (intensity 3) similar
to the one observed by X-ray diffraction in sample 2. In the
remaining bones the masks are formed by depositions of intensity 2.
The limits of these masks are in general very well-defined.
In most cases, the surface of the bone not affected by the mask
is coated by a primary metallic deposition of less intensity (intensity 2) (Fig. 7a), but sometimes affect bones with no primary
deposition. In these cases the contrast is much more
striking, being remarkable the black spot on the pale yellowcoloured bone (Fig. 7b).
Fig. 4. The manganese coatings also coat the medullar cavity of fragmented
bones and progress towards the compact bone as can be seen in the cross section of this cave bear’s rib (scale bar is 3 cm).

with a much lower intensity than the rest of the piece. Only in
five specimens the proximal articular surface had no coatings
and the distal one was coated; and there are six bones in which
the distal surface is the one without metallic deposits.
Although they only account for 17.4% of the total of the
bone sample, if the proportion is calculated with respect to
those bones that preserve articulate surfaces, the percentages
considerably increase (Table 3). Nearly half of the limb
bones (42.4%) have articular surfaces with no deposition;
this proportion rises to 60.0% in carpals and tarsals, in phalanxes to 64.2% and in metapodials to 73.2%. Something
similar occurs with the points on which the tendons are

3.4. Carnivores’ and micromammals’ marks
In one part of the bone sample of Liñares the existence of
a series of marks produced by the action of different types of
carnivores or scavengers could be clearly identified. Only 240
(18.5%) out of 1295 remains have some of these marks (Table 3).
There are large punctures most probably caused by cave
bears [19,26,34] and punctures and gnawing of medium-sized
(grey wolf-like) to small-sized (red fox-like) carnivores, and
micromammals’ gnawing. In total 143 bones with punctures
(59.6% of the sample affected by carnivores), 129 with gnawing (53.8%) and 188 fractures produced by carnivores (78.3%)
were identified. In all the cases the manganese coatings cover
the marks resulting from the carnivores’ action.
The presence of micromammals’ gnawing on the surface of
some bones had a testimonial effect. Only 21 bones have

Fig. 5. The secondary depositions also cover dental pieces (a) and articular surfaces (b) that were not affected by primary coatings. Both are red deer’s remains
(scale bar in a is 10 cm, in b is 1 cm).

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

712

Fig. 6. Most of the articular surfaces are without manganese coatings and often tendon insertions too, usually in yellowish colours, strongly contrasting with the
dark coating on the rest of the piece, as can be observed in this red deer’s femur. (a) Medial view, (b) posterior view. Scale bar is 10 cm.

prints of micromammals’ action. This action is recorded on the
surface of the bones as parallel broad grooves e up to 5 mm
wide and 6 mm long e of little depth with flat bottom sometimes having a slight striation. In three cases, we can see that
the action frequently repeated on a same point reaches the medullar cavity. If the carnivores’ marks were affected by the deposition, the micromammals’ marks, on the contrary, are
superimposed on the manganese coatings.
Table 3
Data of the number of remains with articular surfaces without manganese coatings and of number of remains affected by carnivores in the bone sample of
Liñares
Sample
Cranial remains
Vertebrae
Sternum þ ribs
Scapular þ pelvic girdles
Limb bones
Carpals þ tarsals
Metapodials
Phalanges
Unidentified
Total

NR

A

B

AþB

309
206
330
67
151
45
41
53
93

4
28
16
22
64
27
30
34
0

22
48
79
12
49
1
4
1
24

0
4
2
4
11
0
1
0
0

1295

225

240

22

NR: number of remains, A: articular surface with no coating, B: affected by
carnivores.

3.5. Elemental composition of metallic coatings
We identified this intense superficial coating as metallic deposits composed of iron and manganese oxides.
The X-ray diffraction made on the surface of the fragment
of scapula is shown in Fig. 8a. Therein, it may be seen that the
major elements are calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P), since
they are the bone components. The minor elements are aluminium (Al), silicon (Si) and the element responsible for the
dark shade of this bone, manganese (Mn).
No units appear in the graphic. It is a qualitative analysis of
the elements that appear on the sample, even though an estimation of percentages may be given for each one’s representation. Calcium is about 60% and phosphorous is 30%. The
elements we are interested in are in a much lower proportion:
manganese at 3% and iron (Fe) at 2.5%.
The analysis of the section of the scapula gives a very similar result as it may be seen in Fig. 8b. Calcium and phosphorous are the major elements (40% and 20%, respectively) and
the signal of manganese increases a little (9.2%) and the iron
(6.8%). Also, the presence of atoms of aluminium, silicon,
copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) is detected in much lower
proportions.
With regard to the fragment of antler, as expected due to the
intense black colour of the superficial coating, by means of the

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

713

Fig. 7. The secondary depositions frequently appear as spots with very well-defined limits, covering primary depositions or not. Examples are a red deer’s humerus
(a) (scale bar is 10 cm) and a red deer’s femur (b) (scale bar is 5 cm).

EDS analysis we have detected as major elements calcium,
phosphorous and manganese, the latter with a signal of 50%.
Iron is also easily detected (Fig. 8c). In section the result is
very similar. The major elements are calcium, phosphorous,
manganese and iron and the minor ones are aluminium, silicon, potassium (K), copper and zinc (Fig. 8d).
Both in the fragment of scapula and in the antler one manganese and iron appear (in a higher proportion), which are the
elements responsible for the different shades of the bones on
the surface, as it was previously supposed. The manganese oxides would be responsible for the shades that go from bluish
grey to black and the iron oxides would be ochre- and duncoloured, being one colour or the other dominant according
to the proportion that each element presents on each bone.
Even though the scapula has a very intense coating given its
dark colour, there are elements more easily detectable, such as
calcium and phosphorous, the main constituents of the bone matter, than the elements that form the metallic deposition (mainly
iron and manganese). A certain very thin roughness of the surface
is appreciated under the electronic microscope (Fig. 9a).
The fragment of antler represents all those bones that have
the maximum intensity of coating even though, frequently,
this circumstance only affects very limited areas of the piece
(the above-mentioned masks with well-defined limits). Unlike
the previous case, now the atoms of iron and manganese, especially the latter, are more easily detected than calcium and phosphorus. This may be due to the fact that the metallic deposition is
much more intense and coats the surface of the bone better; there
are even bones in which this coating has such a considerable
thickness that does not allow seeing any superficial mark that
the bone may have. In the photographs of electronic microscopy
(Fig. 9b, c) it is appreciated that the bone surface is profusely

coated by manganese nodules (botryoidal texture-dendrites)
that give it a much rougher aspect than the one described for
the example of the scapula and that would justify the fact that
these pieces dirty one’s fingers when handling them.
4. Discussion
4.1. Origin of the manganese oxides
The existence of manganese in the site and the formation
mechanism of superficial coatings are relatively easy to explain. Manganese constitutes about 0.085% of the crust but
it is abundant in certain environments, for example in calcareous rocks [7,10].
The soluble manganese compounds are mobilised at the
same time that the disintegrating of the limestone is produced
and transported in the water that percolates through the sediment. But they precipitate with the variation of pH [15], in
this case on the surface of the bones.
The environment of the cave is characterised as wet, mildly alkaline, and oxidising. Under these conditions, the stable form of
iron and of manganese is hydrates and manganese oxide compounds, respectively. These stable forms are highly insoluble,
so these materials tend to form crusts and coatings in caves [38].
Hill [13] explains three processes for manganese deposits
formation. Cave manganese may derive from circulating water
or from minor amounts of manganese in the surrounding limestone bedrock. Manganese is dissolved by groundwater in the
presence of CO2 by formation of the soluble bicarbonate, Mn
(HCO3)2. Carbon dioxide loss, oxidation, and evaporation in
the cave environment concentrate the manganese in incoming
solutions, whereupon the manganese is precipitated [13].

714

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

Fig. 8. Analyses of X-ray diffraction carried out to check the elementary composition of metallic coating affecting most of the bone sample of Liñares.

Manganese may also form soluble organic compounds with
citric, acetic, oxalic, or humic acids in a reducing environment. Descending groundwater transports soluble reduced
manganese until oxidising cave conditions are found: oxidation causes the formation of insoluble organic manganese
compounds [13].
Microorganisms are also involved in the formation of manganese deposits because they release the manganese ion when
utilising the organic part of complex molecules [11,13,23,24].
The superficial manganese coatings have seldom been mentioned for other palaeontological sites. The only mention
known for the Iberian Peninsula [9] gives neither a description
of the phenomenon or of the intensity of the deposition, nor
a description of the process used to determine the composition.
4.2. Burial and primary deposition
The uniformity of the primary coatings suggests that they
were formed once the bones were buried under conditions of
water saturation of the sediment. Firstly, the deposition is

superficially produced and later on the metallic deposits would
penetrate the bone (Fig. 4). In the bones fractured before or
during the burial, the metallic deposition may also radially advance from the medullar cavity filled with water-saturated
clay. Anyway, the penetration grade is very low and it largely
depends on the nature of the bone and the process intensity.
In section most of the compact bone has no metallic deposits, preserving a clear natural colour. Such drastic difference
on the shade of the bone helps recognising whether the fracture affecting a certain piece is previous to the metallic deposition or not.
The fact that certain bones show articular surfaces and muscular insertions without manganese coatings (Fig. 6) suggests
the possibility that the bones remained in anatomic connection
for a certain period of time after the animal’s death, at least
until the burial of the bones in the sedimentary infill. The finding of pieces in anatomic connection during the excavation
backs this hypothesis. This fact could be interpreted at first
as a result of possible histological differences as to the bone
structure of these parts of the bone. However, this does not

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

715

Fig. 9. Surface aspect of manganese coating under the electronic microscope. (a) Fragment of a red deer’s scapula (sample 1) with very thin roughness surface. (b
and c) Fragment of a red deer’s antler (sample 2) profusely covered by manganese nodules (botryoidal texture).

seem to be the case since there are bones that have the articular
surfaces affected (Fig. 5b).
The marks resulting from the carnivores’ action are affected
by the manganese coatings, therefore indicating that they were
made before the burial of the remains. Interestingly, an inverse
relationship between carnivores’ action and clean articular surfaces was observed (Table 3). Most of the bones (90.2%) with
the articular surfaces free of manganese coatings are not damaged by carnivores, that is to say, the burial took place when
they were still articulated. Likewise, 90.8% of the bones that
show action of carnivores have the articular surfaces covered
by the manganese coatings, therefore, they were disarticulated
before the burial. Only 9.2% of the bones affected by the action of carnivores show articular surfaces free of manganese
coverings. These data indicate that the carnivores’ action
was not intense, and that most of the articular units were preserved until the burial.
4.3. Reworking of the sequence and secondary
deposition
We could observe that with noticeable frequency the coating with the manganese deposits was not uniform due to the
heterogeneity of the sedimentary infill. The variation of the environmental conditions in which the fossilisation is produced
causes differences in preservation, also in different fragments
of a same bone element. This is the case of a radius found

fractured in the site, even though its later reconstruction was
possible at the laboratory. The proximal half of this piece
has a darker shade than the distal half.
Another example of how the superficial coatings may be
useful as indicators of environmental conditions will be found
in the bones located on the northern side of the middle part of
the hole at about 4 m in depth. Mostly complete skeletons of
a bear and two red deer preserved in anatomic connection
were found there.
Unlike the rest of the bone sample, these remains had no
superficial coating or a light coating. However, the bones
found at the bottom of the hole are intensively affected with
the coating, most of them with the maximum intensity. It
was observed that, initially, they did not have manganese coating, but, unlike the previous case, the secondary coatings intensively affect them, in many cases on the whole surface.
The secondary coatings affect bones covered completely,
partially or with no initial deposition, therefore it is an independent process of the previous deposition, and occurs later
in time. The formation of masks (Fig. 7) is interpreted as
the existence of circulating water through the sediments that
produced a reworking of the infill in some points of the site.
After the burial of the bones and their coating with metallic
deposits, some remains were affected again by this process, including pieces that had no previous deposition.
Another clue to identify the reworking processes is inferred
from the micromammals’ marks. These marks are superimposed

716

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717

on the coatings, indicating that those bones were occasionally
exposed to the surface after the initial burial.
5. Conclusions
The interest in quantifying the formation of manganese
coatings over fossil bones as a taphonomic process lies in
the possibility that they can be superimposed on other features
or taphonomic marks previously existing on the surface of the
bones. In turn, the coatings can be affected by other taphonomic agents that modified them totally or partially.
The study of these coatings that affect most of the pieces
provides us with valuable information on the sequence where
the different detected taphonomic processes were produced, as
for example: (i) the preservation of anatomic connections until
after the burial of the carcasses, (ii) the intervention of carnivores in the disarticulation of some elements before the burial,
(iii) the micromammals’ action made in most of the cases after
the initial burial of bones, and (iv) the existence of reworking
processes in some parts of the infill.
The coatings were formed when the bones were exposed to
water draining through the sediment. In general, the deposits
coated the whole surface of the pieces. These superficial coatings frequently affect neither the articular surfaces nor the
muscular insertions, suggesting the preservation of anatomic
connections from the death of the animals up to the burial
of bones. These surfaces would be protected during the precipitation of manganese oxides by other bones, ligaments and
tendons.
Once the carcasses were buried, the skeletons stayed in anatomic connection for sometime, in some cases until the bones
were recovered in the excavation. The bioturbation produced
by scavengers before the burial affected only a small number
of skeletal elements. The action of carnivores would be partly
responsible for the disarticulation and spreading of some anatomic units before the burial, as was shown by the inverse correlation existing between the absence of coatings on the
articular surfaces and the carnivores’ gnawing marks. On the
contrary, the action of micromammals was made either before
or after the burial of the bones, the latter much more frequently.
This would imply that those bones were occasionally exposed
to the surface during reworking episodes of the infill.
The presence of secondary coatings and manganese masks
also indicates episodes of reworking. These secondary coatings cover bone areas with primary coatings whatever its intensity and also affect the articular surfaces and the
muscular insertions that had been without coating at first.
They have even been found coating the enamel of the dental
pieces that normally have no primary coatings. The significant
proportion of bones with secondary coatings and manganese
masks suggests that the reworking of the infill, favoured by
the natural slope and the repeated water flow through the sediments are responsible for the scattering of the bones in some
points of the site.
Our results indicate how the study of a taphonomic feature
usually disregarded in the studies when the action of man is
not suspected can provide valuable information about the

origin and the sequence of formation of the deposit. This
method can be extended to any bone assemblage in caves
that shows these black-coloured manganese coatings, which
is a quite common feature both in human-mediated and natural
bone assemblages.
Acknowledgements
This research was conducted thanks to the logistic support
of the Laboratorio Xeolóxico de Laxe (O Castro-Sada, Spain).
We are also very grateful to the Grupo de Espeleoloxı́a Brigantium (A Coruña) and to the Federación Galega de Espeleoloxı́a for their field assistance. This paper is a contribution to
the XUGA PGIDT 00 PXI16201PR Research Project.
References
[1] R.V. Bellomo, A methodological approach for identifying archaeological
evidence of fire resulting from human activities, Journal of Archaeological Science 20 (1993) 525e553.
[2] J.L. Bennett, Thermal alteration of buried bone, Journal of Archaeological Science 26 (1999) 1e8.
[3] L.R. Binford, An analysis of cremations from three Michigan sites, Wisconsin Archeologist 44 (1963) 98e110.
[4] C.K. Brain, The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction to African Cave
Taphonomy (1981) (Chicago).
[5] C.K. Brain, A. Sillen, Evidence from the Swartkrans cave for the earliest
use of fire, Nature 336 (1988) 464e466.
[6] J.E. Buikstra, M. Swegle, Bone modification due to burning: experimental evidence, in: R. Bonnichsen, M.H. Sorg (Eds.), Bone Modification,
Center for the Study of the First Americans, University of Maine, Orono,
1989, pp. 247e258.
[7] F. Burriel, F. Lucena, S. Arribas, J. Hernández, Quı́mica Analı́tica Cualitativa, 13a ed., Paraninfo, Madrid, 1989.
[8] C.R. Cain, Using burned animal bone to look at Middle Stone Age
occupation and behavior, Journal of Archaeological Science 32 (2005)
873e884.
[9] J.L. Cardoso, Contribuiç~ao para o conhecimento dos grandes mamiferos
do Plistocénico Superior de Portugal, Centro de Estudos Arqueológicos
do Concelho de Oeiras, Oeiras, 1993.
[10] F.A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, Quı́mica Inorgánica avanzada, 4a ed., Limusa,
México, 1993.
[11] R.I. Dorn, T.M. Oberlander, Microbial origin of desert varnish, Science
213 (1981) 1245e1247.
[12] A. Grandal-d’Anglade, F. López-González, J.R. Vidal-Romanı́, Condicionantes en la distribución de macromamı́feros en Galicia (NW de la
Penı́nsula Ibérica) durante el Cuaternario superior, Cadernos do Laboratorio Xeolóxico de Laxe 22 (1997) 43e66.
[13] C.A. Hill, Origin of black deposits in caves, National Speleological
Society Bulletin 44 (1982) 15e19.
[14] E. Johnson, Human modified bones from early southern Plains Sites, in:
R. Bonnichsen, M.H. Sorg (Eds.), Bone Modification, Center for the
Study of the First Americans, University of Maine, Orono, 1989,
pp. 431e471.
[15] P. Karkanas, O. Bar-Yosef, P. Goldberg, S. Weiner, Diagenesis in prehistoric caves: the Use of Minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the archaeological record, Journal of Archaeological Science 27
(2000) 915e929.
[16] B. Kurtén, The Cave Bear Story, Columbia University Press, New York,
1976.
[17] F. López-González, A. Grandal-d’Anglade, J.R. Vidal-Romanı́, Análisis
tafonómico de la muestra ósea de Liñares sur (Lugo, Galicia), Cadernos
do Laboratorio Xeolóxico de Laxe 22 (1997) 67e80.

F. López-González et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006) 707e717
[18] F. López-González, M. Vila-Taboada, A. Grandal-d’Anglade, Sobre la
acumulación diferencial de Cervus elaphus en los yacimientos en cueva,
in: L. Pallı́-Buxó, C. Roqué-Pau (Eds.), Avances en el estudio del Cuaternario español, 1999, pp. 285e292 (Girona).
[19] F. López-González, Paleontology and Taphonomy of Pleistocene Macromammals of Galicia (NW Iberian Peninsula) Serie Nova Terra no. 22,
2003.
[20] D.A. McKeown, J.E. Post, Characterization of manganese oxide mineralogy in rock varnish and dendrites using X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
American Mineralogist 86 (2001) 701e713.
[21] G.W. Moore, Manganese deposition in limestone caves, in: B.F. Beck
(Ed.), Proceedings of the Eighth International Congress Speleology
(1981), pp. 642e644.
[22] R.A. Nicholson, A morphological investigation of burnt animal bone and
an evaluation of its utility in Archaeology, Journal of Archaeological
Science 20 (1993) 411e428.
[23] D.E. Northup, K.H. Lavoie, Geomicrobiology of caves: a review, Geomicrobiology Journal 18 (2001) 199e222.
[24] F.E. Palmer, J.T. Staley, R.G.E. Murray, T. Counsell, J.B. Adams, Identification of manganese-oxidizing bacteria from desert varnish, Geomicrobiology Journal 4 (1986) 343e360.
[25] S.B. Peck, Bacterial deposition of iron and manganese oxides in North
American caves, National Speleological Society Bulletin 48 (1986)
26e30.
[26] A.C. Pinto Llona, P.J. Andrews, Scavenging behaviour patterns in cave
bears Ursus spelaeus, in: M.D. Renzi, M.V.P. Alonso, M. Belinchón,
E. Peñalver, P. Montoya, A. Márquez-Aliaga (Eds.), Current Topics on
Taphonomy and Fossilization, Gráficas Ronda, Valencia, 2002, pp.
509e516.
[27] R.M. Potter, G.R. Rossman, Mineralogy of manganese dendrites and
coatings, American Mineralogist 64 (1979) 26e30.
[28] G. Rabeder, D. Nagel, M. Pacher, Der Höhlenbär, Jan Thorbecke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 2000.
[29] R.J.R. Raymond, G.D. Guthrie, D.L. Bish, S.L. Reneau, S.J. Chipera, Biomineralization of manganese within rock varnish, in: H.C. Skinner,
R. Fitzpatrick (Eds.), Biomineralization: processes of iron and

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

717

manganesedmodern and ancient environments, Catena Supplemental
21 (1992) 321e335 (Catena Verlag, Cremlingen-Destedt, Germany).
S. Schiegl, P. Goldberg, H.U. Pfretzschner, N.J. Conard, Paleolithic burnt
bone horizons from the Swabian Jura: distinguishing between in situ fireplaces and dumping areas, Geoarchaeology - An International Journal 18
(2003) 541e565.
R. Shahack-Gross, O. Bar-Yosef, S. Weiner, Black-coloured bones in
Hayonim Cave, Israel: differentiating between burning and oxide staining, Journal of Archaeological Science 24 (1997) 439e446.
R. Shahack-Gross, F. Bernaa, P. Karkanasb, S. Weiner, Bat guano and
preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites, Journal of Archaeological Science 31 (2004) 1259e1272.
P. Shipman, G. Foster, M. Schoeninger, Burnt bones and teeth: an experimental study of color, morphology, crystal structure and shrinkage,
Journal of Archaeological Science 11 (1984) 307e325.
M.C. Stiner, Mortality analysis of Pleistocene bears and its paleoanthropological relevance, Journal of Human Evolution 34 (1998) 303e326.
I. Thery-Parusit, Fuel management (bone and wood) during the Lower
Aurignacian in the Pataud Rock Shelter (Lower Palaeolithic, Les Eyzies
de Tayac, Dordogne, France). Contribution of experimentation, Journal
of Archaeological Science 29 (2002) 1415e1421.
M.D. Thurman, L.J. Willmore, A replicative cremation experiment,
North American Archaeologist 2 (1981) 275e283.
S. Weiner, Q.Q. Xu, P. Goldberg, J.Y. Liu, O. Bar-Yosef, Evidence for the
use of fire at Zhoukoudian, China, Science 281 (1998) 251e253.
W.B. White, Cave minerals and speleothems, in: T.D. Ford,
C.H.D. Cullingford (Eds.), The Science of Speleology, Academic Press,
London, 1976, pp. 267e327.
T.R. Whyte, Distinguishing remains of human cremations from burned
animal bones, Journal of Field Archaeology 28 (2001) 437e448.
I. Zamarreño, A. Perejón, El nivel carbonatado del Cámbrico de Piedrafita (Zona Asturoccidental-leonesa, NW de España): Tipos de facies y
faunas de Arqueociatos, Breviora Geologica Asturica 20 (1976) 17e32.
I. Zamarreño, J.L. Hermosa, J. Bellamy, D. Rabu, Litofacies del nivel carbonatado del Cámbrico de la región de Ponferrada (Zona Asturoccidental-leonesa, NW de España), Breviora Geologica Asturica 19 (1975) 39e40.

