Current Anthropology

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

S65

A Landscape Architecture of Fire
Cultural Emergence and Ecological Pyrodiversity
in Australia’s Western Desert
by Douglas W. Bird, Rebecca Bliege Bird, Brian F. Codding,
and Nyalangka Taylor
Aboriginal foraging systems in Australia’s Western Desert have been structured around landscape-burning
practices for millennia. These systems are mediated at one end by factors that inﬂuence an immediate-return
economy and at the other by the way that burning transforms vegetative succession and habitat heterogeneity
(pyrodiversity). The distinctive pyrodiversity of anthropogenic landscapes are where Martu insist that they and
their estates are conceived. These estates are transgenerational storehouses of relational wealth that operate in a
delayed-return ritual economy. These storehouses were ransacked by colonialism in the mid-twentieth century,
precipitating a collapse in the anthropogenic ﬁre regime and a decline and extinction of many endemic species.
Since returning to their homelands in the 1980s, Martu have reestablished a tight patchwork of vegetative succession and rescaled the landscape mosaic. Previous work has shown how the emergent ecological consequences of
foraging and burning interact to create greater local diversity, increase landscape patchiness at massive spatial
scales, and buffer against climate-driven ecosystem disturbance. In this paper we explore how the rescaling of patch
diversity through anthropogenic ﬁre operates as a form of dynamic cultural and ecological niche construction
shaping systems of sociality among people and their interactions with other species.

A call to demolish the two-story ediﬁce of dualism constructed
to separate humans from nonhumans is nothing new. It
should be demolished not only because our natural worlds are
culturally constructed but because our cultural worlds are
wholly natural. Cultural niches and social intuitions are constructed in the interactions of decisions, bodies, materials,
values, and intentions of organic beings designed by natural
selection. The barriers that we build between natural and artiﬁcial phenomena are constructs speciﬁc to very particular

Douglas W. Bird is Associate Professor in the Department of Anthropology at Pennsylvania State University (409 Carpenter Building, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, U.S.A. [dwd5537@psu
.edu]). Rebecca Bliege Bird is Professor in the Department of Anthropology at Pennsylvania State University (409 Carpenter Building, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, U.S.A. [rub33@psu.edu]).
Brian F. Codding is Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Utah (270 South 1400 East, Room
102, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, U.S.A. [brian.codding@anthro.utah
.edu]). Nyalangka Taylor is a Manyjilyjarra Martu woman and Senior Custodian of the Kulyakarta estates in the far northern regions
of Martu country. She is a renowned hunter, ecologist, translator, and
artist at Martumili Artists (Parnngurr Aboriginal Community, Via
Newman, Western Australia 6753, Australia). This paper was submitted 18 IV 15, accepted 19 I 16, and electronically published 9 V 16.

contexts. In many other worlds, no such dichotomy exists,
or it exists in radically different forms (see Elkin 1969 for an
Australian example). An important goal, then, in developing a
reintegrated anthropology—one that combines rigorous empirical analysis with an appreciation of diverse epistemologies
and institutions fashioned in complex interactions between
people, other species, and physical space—is to
render intelligible the way in which organisms of a particular
kind ﬁnd a place in the world, acquire a stable representation
of it, and contribute to its transformation by forging with it
and between one another links either constant or occasional
and of remarkable but not inﬁnite diversity. . . . For although
it is commonly said, these days, that worlds are constructed,
it is not known who are their architects and we still have very
little idea about what materials are used in building them.
(Descola 2013:xvii)

Reintegrating anthropology as imagined by Wiessner (2016)
and Fuentes (2016) will involve just that: ﬁguring out (1) who
the architects of niches are and (2) what construction materials they are using. We suggest this will require building a
science that fully embraces an understanding of people in
ecosystemic relationships. This will involve deliberate acts of
both analytical reductionism and holism to identify scaled
links between processes that shape decision making in resource use and vehicles through which they emerge as com-

q 2016 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2016/57S13-0007$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/685763

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S66

Current Anthropology

plex systems.1 We see the contributions to this special issue of
Current Anthropology as an honest attempt to continue the
job. All of the contributors to the Wenner-Gren conference
from which this volume grew were intent on seeking explanations of diverse human worlds, including peoples’ complex
and divergent representational models and perceptions of life,
by teasing apart processes and materials that shape the ways
through which our habitats (or niches) are constructed, experienced, and made meaningful.
In what follows we set out to investigate some of the players, interactions, and materials used in constructing aspects of
Martu worlds in a remote part of Australia’s Western Desert
(ﬁg. 1). We are especially concerned with measuring factors that
inﬂuence contemporary Martu hunting decisions, the expressions of which are mediated in social practices and the application of landscape ﬁre, that feed back through ecological
mechanisms to transform social-environmental relationships.2
We agree with recent theorists such as Descola (2013) and
others (e.g., Cormier 2003; Hartigan 2014; Kohn 2013) in
calling into question notions that we, because of culture, exist
buffered from the natural environment. While this is old hat
in anthropology, “a dichotomy between the material and the
mental, between ecological interactions in nature and cultural
constructions of nature” (Ingold 1996:144) continues to dominate the policy and science of global environmental change,
where “human dimensions” are cast principally in terms of
how people affect the “natural” system (Castree et al. 2014). In
this paper we hope to further dissolve such dichotomies, but
1. Our use of “emergence” follows a common deﬁnition in evolutionary ecology, focusing on the synergistic processes shaping system
organization that feed back on the ﬁtness-related trade-offs of the organisms that compose complex systems. “In evolutionary processes,
causation is iterative; effects are also causes. And this is equally true of
the synergistic effects produced by emergent systems. In other words,
emergence itself . . . has been the underlying cause of the evolution of
emergent phenomena in biological evolution; it is the synergies produced by organized systems that are the key” (Corning 2002). This is
not a call to a return of the old systems ecology of the 1960s and 1970s
but instead to a new ecology that fully embraces agency and a science of
individual decision making while recognizing the emergent properties
of larger-scale social and ecological systems that interact with individual
decisions.
2. Much has been written about how Western Desert Aboriginal selves
and identities are conceived in relation to country and landesque capital:
Aboriginal “country” is constituted within sets of social practices, dynamic rights, and contested values that link people to land (e.g., Dussart
2000; Myers 1988; Tonkinson 2007, 2011; Tonkinson and Tonkinson
2010). As Tonkinson (2011) and Myers (2002) so clearly explain for
Western Desert Martu and Pintupi, respectively, their ngurra—their
homelands—come into being not only through the lived experience of
hunting and gathering (the concrete labor entangled in an environment
of direct experience, sensu Ingold 1996, 2008) but also through processes
of previous and lived experience shaped at all points by tiers of social interaction. “People do not simply ‘experience’ the world; they are taught—
indeed, disciplined—to signify their experiences in distinctive ways”
(Myers 2002:103).

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

we do so from a reductionist stance. In the heart of the analysis presented here, we intend to show how reducing complex
phenomena to measurements of key interactions gives critical
insight into the processes involved in making dynamic and
complex social-ecological systems. This provides an ecological and quantitative perspective into how Aboriginal people
often characterize themselves and their lands. Thus, we argue
that distinctive Martu selves do not exist independently of the
ecological relationships that make and signify family and
homelands (Tonkinson 2011). Their notions of homeland and
family are inherently relational, similar to notions captured in
oikos, the Greek for home and the root for ecology.
It is important to note at the outset that the relationships
many Martu have with their country, framed in Jukurrpa (the
Dreaming, as discussed below), do not reﬂect a “conservation
ethic,” or what Sponsel (2012) refers to as “spiritual ecology.”
As Martu often explain it, the Dreaming is more than just a
spiritual relationship between them and the natural world.
Many traditionally oriented Martu believe that the proper
taking and use of resources—not their conservation—is the
key to a healthy country and healthy selves. To conserve resources is akin to hoarding and requires managing the labor
and consumption of others through dictatorial action. Moreover, they do not perceive of themselves as having a spiritual
connection that makes them “closer to the land” and thus
natural conservationists; they insist that they are their country in the sense that humans are a critical component of ecological relationships. For many Martu, country and self are
foraged in work (spiritual, ritual, mundane) that consumes
and regenerates, especially in the application of ﬁre to the
landscape. There are sacred geographies, but they are diverse
in scale and arbitrated in the intensity of living interactions
and exchange between people, other species, and place. The
key, as Tonkinson (2005) and Myers (1988) have suggested, is
in how a lived world of material transfers between and among
people and other species is interwoven with a world of religiously/spiritually constituted ownership (Bird and Bliege
Bird 2010; Bliege Bird et al. 2012a). At the core of these relationships are practices associated with landscape burning
and the way it is situated in the function of ecological systems.
Following a summary of contemporary Martu economies
and ecological organization, we illustrate how many Martu
express the architecture of their country and how they conceive of themselves and their land-based estates especially in
relation to ﬁre. We then provide a rough framework to situate
humans in general as niche constructors, especially in the
emergence of distinctively pyrodiverse habitats. We argue that
such a framework requires investigating the effects of existential trade-offs people face in decisions about resource use.
We thus describe the ways that Martu hunting decisions
transform their lands into homelands in a series of analyses
based on Martu accounts and quantitative records of over a
decade of participant observation in Martu foraging, and we
combine this with remote sensing and spatial analyses of
anthropogenic and nonanthropogenic landscapes. We argue

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

S67

Figure 1. Map of the Martu homelands showing the Martu Native Title (darkest gray), Karlamilyi National Park (light gray within the
Native Title), and the location of the three remote Martu communities within the Native Title (Parnngurr, Punmu, and Kunawarritji).

that these distinctively measurable landscapes emerge from
the daily business of hunting and make up the owned ritual
estates that form the basis of Martu-conceived heritage.

Martu Economic and Ecological Organization
The contemporary economy in remote Martu communities
is a hybrid of customary, state, and market sectors (sensu
Altman, Biddle, and Buchanan 2012). In Parnngurr (ﬁg. 1),
the community where we are based, this includes hunting,
gathering, some wage labor in mining and related industry,
arts and crafts production through Martumili Artists (supported by the East Pilbara Shire), a new ranger program for
Karlamiliyi National Park and Martu Native Title Lands (facilitated by the Martu-based NGO Karnyirninpa Jukurrpa),
as well as government beneﬁt payments, some money from
the Martu Lands trust, and work in the Community Development Employment Program. The links are dynamic, and
labor within each sector is interwoven with commercial, subsistence, social, and religious values (Bird et al., forthcoming).
Since the early 1990s Parnngurr has also had a community-

run primary school staffed by a Martu advisory council and
mostly non-Aboriginal teachers. Based on a series of observational time-allocation surveys conducted in 2006 (Scelza,
Bird, and Bliege Bird 2014) and 2009–2010 (Codding 2012;
Codding et al. 2016), our research team recorded that adults
and children ﬁve and over in Parnngurr spend an average of
23% of their days foraging, producing bush foods that make
up 29%–49% of daily caloric intake for a person (man, woman,
or child). Today this often involves the use of vehicles to access temporary foraging camps from which most hunting and
gathering then proceeds on foot. Foraging—modiﬁed with the
incorporation of new technologies, entanglements with markets and governments, and changing mobility and settlement
patterns—remains fundamental to ecological and social organization.
Contemporary Foraging
Between 2000 and 2010, members of our research team participated in 368 foraging trips with Martu. During foraging
trips (averaging just over eight foragers per trip), we recorded

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S68

Current Anthropology

party composition, route, locale, and time that each participant
devoted to active foraging. Resources acquired were counted
and weighed before processing, usually at mirrka ngurra (see
below), a locale where foragers gathered to prepare, share, and
eat before returning to the settlement. Edible masses were
converted into caloric measures using Brand-Miller, James,
and Maggiore (1993). These records make up a data set of
1,831 individual adult foraging bouts consisting of all the time
each forager spent in search, pursuit, capture, and processing
of resources per day.
Men, women, and children are active hunters. Men tend
to concentrate more of their effort on larger game (especially
kangaroo and bustard hunting, which together make up 61%
of men’s foraging time), and women focus much of their foraging in pedestrian sandplain hunting, targeting sand monitor lizards (which makes up 72% of women’s foraging time).
However, there is a high degree of ﬂuidity in gendered differences of labor, and there are times when men and women
cooperate in hunting, especially during the summer in longdistance pursuits of large monitor lizards (Bird, Bliege Bird,
and Codding 2009; Bliege Bird and Bird 2005, 2008; Codding,
Bliege Bird, and Bird 2011).
Today, mutually exclusive foraging activities (made so by
differences in habitat, technology, seasonality, and search
strategy; see Bird et al. 2009, 2013 for details) are usually organized around the search for ﬁve staple animal prey: hill kangaroo (kirti-kirti [Macropus robustus], 24.7% of total production by whole weight), bustard (kipara [Ardeotis australis],
24.1%), sand monitor (parnajarlpa [Varanus gouldii], 19.1%),
larger monitors (maruntu and yalapara [Varanus giganteus
and Varanus panoptes], 2.7%), and feral house cats (1.5%).
The remaining bush food comes mostly from solanum fruit,
nectar, geophytes, and feral camel. When they choose to go out,
a forager typically acquires about 3,000 kcal per day.
While kangaroo and bustard hunting produce occasional
bonanzas, much of daily bush food comes from pedestrian
hunting in spinifex (Triodia spp.)–dominated grasslands.
The activity targets sand monitor but also includes the onencounter pursuit of skinks, snakes, fruit, feral cats, and larger
monitors. As shorthand we will refer to this as “sandplain
hunting.” Martu refer to the activity as parnajarlpa wartilpa,
or sand monitor hunting, because sand monitors are the
principal resource acquired. Overall, Martu in Parnngurr allocate more time to sandplain hunting than any other type of
foraging activity. While this type of hunting is an important
economic activity for all, it is especially so for older women
and when money is short (Bird et al., forthcoming; Bliege Bird
and Bird 2008; Scelza et al. 2014).
Contemporary Burning
Because monitor lizards are denned in the cool-dry season,
sandplain hunting is constrained by den visibility, so foragers
either target patches characterized by early-successional vegetation or set a broadcast ﬁre to clear off a large patch of older

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

growth vegetation to expose a searchable area. Hunters work
alone or in small cooperative groups, searching for dens and
tracks and probing the area around an encountered den with
a long, narrow digging stick to locate the resting chamber,
which lies 10–20 cm belowground.
In the winter, if foragers do not burn a patch of latesuccessional-age vegetation, they gain only 25 5 407 (SE) kcal
per hour of search and pursuit. Older-growth vegetation inhibits search, and at that rate (given energy expended while
foraging), on average hunters would work at energetic deﬁcit.
However, if they burn those patches, their returns increase
dramatically to 1,552 5 326 kcal per hour (Bliege Bird et al.
2013). Then, over the course of an average foraging bout (just
under 3 hours), a single forager can very reliably supply daily
food requirements for two to three people. There is a clear
linear relationship between time invested and harvest size, so
unlike less reliable activities such as kangaroo and bustard
hunting, foragers can predictably adjust harvest sizes with
more search if there are more consumers at camp (Codding,
Bird, and Bliege Bird 2010). Both men and women conduct
broadcast burns while sandplain hunting, but women do so
more often (Bird, Bliege Bird, and Parker 2005; Bliege Bird
et al. 2008).
In the summer, when ﬁre behavior is often unpredictable
and monitors are active on the surface and pursued by tracking, burning is uncommon. Access to ground that was burned
earlier in the year is then critical in the warmer months. Summer returns per hour hunting in late-successional patches are
signiﬁcantly lower (76 5 771) than those in early-successional
patches (1,838 5 446). With ready access to patches burned
earlier in the year, there is little need to burn extensively in
order to pursue lizards in the summertime (Bliege Bird et al.
2013).
The main fuel burned in hunting ﬁres is the highly ﬂammable spinifex hummock grass, mainly Triodia schinzii and
Triodia basedowii, which dominates much of the arid interior
of Australia. Patches regenerating after ﬁre are associated with
different community composition, referred to as seral stages
(Latz and Green 1995; Pianka and Goodyear 2012). Martu
use a ﬁve-tiered seral classiﬁcation of spinifex grasslands to
characterize their landscapes. Nyurnma is the stage immediately following a burn, when there is no surface vegetation
except surviving shrubs and trees. Waru-waru characterizes a
community of new green shoots from the seed bank of diverse
forbs and grasses, usually following a nyurnma within a few
months, depending on precipitation. Nyukura is a community
where fruiting plants have matured, and there is an abundance of resources for people and other herbivores. Herbs
such as Solanum diversiﬂorum and other bush tomatoes, along
with seed grasses such as woolybutt (Eragrostis eriopoda), are
most abundant in nyukura, usually 1–4 years postﬁre. Manguu
characterizes patches where spinifex has started to crowd out
other grasses and forbs, a process that usually takes 5–10 years
following a burn. Manguu has spinifex hummocks close enough
to carry a ﬁre. Kunarka is the ﬁnal stage of spinifex growth, in

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

which large hummocks of grass completely dominate the patch,
and the hummocks are so old that they begin to die in the
middle and form circular rings several meters across, a process
that can take up to 20 years.
Animals, too, show differential ﬁre responses. Bustards
(Ardeotis australis) come into nyurnma to feed and also to enjoy the desert raisin (Solanum centrale) so abundant in nyukura. Hill kangaroo prefer waru-waru, where newly emerging
green shoots offer more nutritious browse, and nyukura, where
solanum fruit is more abundant (Codding et al. 2014). Sand
monitors are omnivorous edge lovers: they often den in “islands” of older growth manguu or even kunarka adjacent to
younger nyukura patches for foraging. As such their populations increase with edge density in the ﬁner-grained anthropogenic mosaics Martu create (Bliege Bird et al. 2012b, 2013).3
Having many different patches at different regrowth stages (a
tight mosaic of seral stages) is a good indicator of both animal
and plant species diversity at the landscape scale (Bliege Bird
et al. 2008).
Contact History and Ecological Changes
Many remote Western Desert people who walked west at European contact are referred to as Martu,4 while those who went
east are called Pintupi. Some bands from a number of dialectnamed groups, mostly Manyjiljarra and Warnman, remained
fully autonomous in the Karlamilyi and Percival Lakes regions
until the mid-1960s, when they went west, mostly to Jigalong
(Davenport, Johnson, and Yuwali 2005; Tonkinson 1991). In
the 1980s many of these people began a process of reoccupying their homelands, establishing three remote communities at
Parnngurr, Punmu, and Kunawarritji in the Little and Great
Sandy Deserts (ﬁg. 1). Unlike other parts of Australia, the Sandy
deserts have been spared the ecological degradation of pastoralism, agriculture, and development: in the absence of Martu,
the desert had been silent, the only visitors being mining exploration teams intent on gold and uranium. Even so, when
Martu returned to their homelands, they confronted an ecosystem far different from the one they had left. Paradoxically,
their hiatus coincided with the local extinction of numerous
species of endemic mammals and the decline of many more.

3. Termite specialists such as Ctenophorus nuchalis, the netted dragon,
a 50–100-g slow-moving lizard, are more prevalent in the recent burns of
nyrunma, while Ctenophorus isolepis, which requires long-unburned spinifex for refuge and thermoregulation, is more abundant in long-unburned
areas (Letnic et al. 2004; Masters 1996; Pianka and Goodyear 2012).
4. “Martu,” meaning “people” (indigenous people), is commonly used
as a term of self-reference for members of different linguistic dialect
groups that migrated to Jigalong in the 1950s and 1960s. It is not a culturally, linguistically, or relationally self-contained ethnic unit, and thus
some of the beliefs and practices we describe for our mainly Manyjiljarra
and Warnman interlocutors in Parnngurr and Punmu will differ from
those described by Tonkinson, who worked mainly with Kartujarra
speakers in Jigalong.

S69

Gone were several small marsupials that had been common
prey: the rufous hare wallaby (mala [Lagorchestes hirsutus]),
the brush-tail possum (wayuta [Trichosurus caninus]), the burrowing bettong (jamparn [Bettongia lesuer]), and the golden
bandicoot (minkajurru [Isodon auratus]), and in their place
were feral house cats, camels, and foxes. These new landscapes
were dominated by extensive lightning ﬁres that burned 10 to
100 times larger than the ﬁres Martu were used to (Bliege Bird,
Codding, and Bird 2016). Nyalangka Tayor recounted that in
2004,
when the ﬁrst lot of folks came to Parnngurr after being
gone for 20 years, they burned the area ﬁrst before they made
their ngurra. When they went out hunting, they burned in
every direction to keep lightning ﬁres from coming close to
camp. Martu like to make sure that they burn areas in all
directions from camp and keep the waru [ﬁre] small, controlled, so that it doesn’t burn places that it shouldn’t.

Between 1986 and 1990, ethnobotanist Fiona Walsh made
several visits to Parnngurr to document customary foraging
and land use and found that ﬁres were becoming smaller and
the country more diverse. Yet people were still concerned that
not enough habitat had been burned, and there was a perception of food scarcity—not just the decline of marsupials
but the disappearance of fruiting trees (e.g., Santalum lanceolatum) and the limited distribution of fruiting forbs, including staples such as solanum fruit. Martu in 1986 “attributed the scarcity of bush food species to factors other then
hunting. In their view, the converse was true, traditionally
oriented people believed hunting, gathering, and the manipulation of country and resources to be critical to their perpetuation” (Walsh 2008:170). That hunting, gathering, and
burning is not the cause of resource scarcity but the critical
support for resource persistence seems paradoxical, and to
many, evidence of a logic that has little to do with ecological
reality. Many Martu insist rather that the continued performance of these activities is critical to the integrity of both the
ecological and socioritual landscapes.

Fire, Food, Family, Home: “We Are [Kin]. . . .
We Are Painters. . . . We Hunt. . . . We Burn.”
The painting shown in ﬁgure 2 is titled Yarrkalpa (hunting
ground). Its accompanying caption, composed in Martu
Wangka by the artists, begins with a rehearsal of the seral
stages of vegetative succession that follow the application of
ﬁre to the landscape (nyurnma, waru-waru, nyukura, manguu,
kunarka) and then transitions to a verse translated here by
Nyalangka Tayor, who is also one of the artists.
We are sisters, mothers, daughters, granddaughters, aunties,
nieces.
We are painters, we are Martu women, caring for our country.
We hunt in this country to look after it.
We burn it, then gather bush fruit.
We burn it, and the animals eat the waru-waru,

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S70

Current Anthropology

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

Figure 2. Kumpaya Girgirba walking in front of a section of the large canvas Yarrkalpa painted by women whose estates make up
contiguous country across the Martu homelands. Yarrkalpa (hunting ground), 2013, 300 cm # 500 cm, by Kumpaya Girgirba,
Yikartu Bumba, Karnu Taylor, Ngamaru Bidu, Yuwali Nixon, Reena Rogers, Thelma Judson, and Nyalangka Taylor. Photo by
Gabrielle Sullivan. Used with permission from Martumili Artists. A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.
Then they get fat, and we hunt and eat the animals:
Goanna, hill-kangaroo, bustard, cat.
We are telling lots of little stories about hunting in the
Parnngurr area
All of the women putting their stories together on a big
canvas.
It is special to teach others—Martu and non-Martu—how
we live now
And always have
In this country.
This country is us.
We need to share it, and talk about it, and protect it . . . keep
it strong.

Each of the eight artists (and their apprentices) has painted
her own estate. An estate is a co-owned body of “little stories”:
sets of owned and heritable responsibilities for maintaining
the ceremony and totemic geography depicted in the painting
as patches and paths forming mosaics from a bird’s-eye view
of the landscape. Each estate contains a core group of custodians who are most closely tied to one of the regions associated with the principal Martu dialect-named groups (mostly
Putijarra, Kartujarra, Kiyajarra, Warnman, and Manyjilyjarra;
Tonkinson 1991). While owned corporately, the estates are
not necessarily clearly bounded units in space or held to the
exclusion of all others by a discrete group of people—each
estate contains individuals who claim the most responsibility

to a core set of sacred sites and ceremonies, but each of those
individuals will also have ties to other estates through negotiations about initiation, decent, spirit travel, totemic conception place, and residence (Tonkinson 2011). Both men and
women can be estate holders (such that siblings are often coowners), but within an estate there are gender-speciﬁc segments of knowledge and ceremonial performance (see Dussart
2000). However, even the most sacred “men’s business” usually requires participation of senior co-owning women (Tonkinson 1991). Below we suggest that Martu estates are constituted by social ties of relational wealth (Borgerhoff Mulder
et al. 2009) facilitated in part through trust bound in foraging,
burning, and food sharing.
Taken together, the whole of the patches, points, and tracks
in ﬁgure 2 represent the ancestral estates that make up much
of the Martu homelands (“All of the women putting their
stories together on a big canvas”). Note that the artists begin
by drawing attention to the ties that deﬁne their social relationships and the means—both on country and on canvas—
used to represent how those relationships are expressed. The
forms used show vegetative mosaics, dunes, watercourses, rock
holes, clay pans, playas, Dreaming tracks, and roads. The shapes
and colors represent both the terraforming activities of ancestral beings and different patches of seral stage regrowth.
Martu often use the patchwork of seral stages (both on the
ground and in painting) as an index of devotion to one’s estate: the efforts of those that hunt to share enough to support

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

large networks of people are signiﬁed in landscapes that Martu
refer to as ngurra juri, or sweet country, that have a tight mosaic of seral stages. In order to share, one must burn the land
(waruku ngurra) to produce food (waruku mirrka). Burning
both destroys and creates, but it is necessary for sharing. And
sharing for Martu is simultaneously virtuous and political
(Bird and Bliege Bird 2010; Bliege Bird et al. 2012a; Bliege
Bird and Power 2015).
The act of painting ngurra juri, or maintaining it through
burning, is as much an asserted claim to an estate as it is an
ecological, commercial, and spiritual representation of home.
Only those artists whose claims are recognized as legitimate
by an audience of fully initiated owners would dare to assert
representation of an estate through painting (Carty 2010), and
only those who know the sacred geography would dare to
burn within an estate. The legitimacy is forged in part through
a reputation built by hunting and sharing. In turn, the cumulative existential processes of foraging and burning on country are a rehearsal of the terraforming acts of ancestral beings
that brought homelands into existence in the Jukurr, the
Dreaming.
Jukurrpa, described by Martu and others variously as “Law”
or “Business” and by anthropologists as “The Everywhen”
(Stanner 1979 [1953]), is cosmology, religion, philosophy,
politics, and natural history. Jukurrpa encompasses the creative epoch of Dreamtime ancestors and the contemporary
practice/knowledge required to sustain a homeland. It is the
totemic geography, epistemology, and body of knowledge and
ceremony concerning the terraforming performance of ancestral beings that left their life force across the landscape, the
sacred and mundane activities that maintain the world, and
prescriptions concerning the nature of the relationships between humans and other species and how those relationships
are sustained (Tonkinson 2011). It “provides an explanation
of nature, establishes a social code, creates a basis for prestige
and political status within the community, acts as a religious
philosophy and forms a psychological basis for life” (Cane
2002). Critical to the perpetuation of life is the proper adherence to the Law contained in Jukurrpa, which for many
Martu frames the importance of hunting and sharing within
the notion that “country must be used and appropriately
burned” if life is to continue. As one elder put it, to stop using
up resources, to stop hunting and burning, would mean “the
end of the world.”
Jones (1969) and others (e.g., Gould 1971) have noted a
clear link between Aboriginal ﬁre ecology, harvestable food
resources, water sources, and religious practice in Jukurrpa.
Gammage (2011) has recently expanded the argument, suggesting that at the time of European invasion, the “landesque
capital” of Aboriginal Australia existed as a set of contiguous
estates held together by systems of land management facilitated by anthropogenic ﬁre. Whether or not these systems
were designed as long-term land management strategies (which
for Martu, we argue, they are not), most acknowledge a profound role for landscape-burning practices in the function

S71

of many Australian societies and ecosystems (Bowman et al.
2011).
For Martu, following the Law set out in Jukurrpa requires
that one burn in particular ways: holding (kanyini) the
country, not managing in top-down fashion, but holding it as
part of a larger set of caretaking responsibilities over people.
To burn outside of the context of permission from estate
owners, or at times or in areas where a ﬁre will threaten sacred
sites, will bring consternation at the least and likely severe
punishment. However, any designed “management” of land is
an epiphenomenon of kanyininpa, the treatment of people
and resources that Martu insist is based on encouraging individual autonomy (sensu Folds 2001). Kanyini means literally to carry something, but it is often used in the context of
nursing: to nurse a child, or to nurse a ﬁre stick and keep it
from going out. When one kanyininpa ngurrara, carries the
country, one is looking after country like one would look after
a child, nurturing, feeding, giving it room to grow according
to its own inevitable processes, fostering its autonomy and
self-direction, and not controlling and managing it.
Traditional Martu beliefs emphasize that holding the country involves reenacting the creative forces ﬁrst established by
the Dreaming ancestors who brought the landforms into existence. Burning is a requisite reenactment of this creation
given expression by the mundane business of everyday work.
This, they say, ensures the fruitful reproduction of Martu, of
species that sustain Martu, and the animals and plants that
sustain those species. Thus, they claim that the estates represented in ﬁgure 2 exist only as a result of the terraforming activities of the Dreamtime ancestors sustained in kanyininpa by
emulating their landscaping through burning.
Nurturing sentiments in kanyininpa are most often expressed through food sharing, especially unconditional sharing (yankupayi) with family (walytja-marri, deﬁned as those of
us who share, whether it be a home, country, birthplace, food).
Kanyininpa creates both walytja and ngurra, a camp. Ngurra is
a profoundly complex term incorporating notions of place,
belonging, home, country, habitat, and generosity (Tonkinson
2005). Elsewhere in Australia there may be more clearly deﬁned
differences between the spatial notions of ngurra and the social
notions of walytja, but many remote-living Manyjilyijarra- and
Warnman-speaking Martu insist the distinction is blurry and
that ngurra exists only within walytja. There is no home without family, and walytja share ngurra by deﬁnition. Ngurra is
not bound in space or time; it can be formed and transformed at
any spatial or temporal scale, with any group of people that
come together as family, especially to share food.5
5. Within a ngurra, kinship always affects how individuals interact,
but kinship does not, in a direct sense, determine the outcome of food
sharing. For example, outside of a highly constrained and speciﬁc religious context, two yumuri (a mother-in-law and son-in-law of orthogonal alternate merged generational groups; Tonkinson 1991) would
never address each other, sit near each other, or make eye contact, let
alone hunt together or directly transfer food between each other. But

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S72

Current Anthropology

Out from the settlement foragers often establish a central
locale to which they return in the evening to prepare, cook,
share, and consume the day’s take. Martu call this a mirrka
ngurra, a dinner camp, and the location of that camp, as well
as the individuals in the foraging party, will usually shift
from day to day. Regardless of how ephemeral, at a mirrka
ngurra, Martu assert they have an obligation to share evenly
with everyone at the camp—if the day’s take was meager,
everyone will be equally hungry (Bliege Bird and Bird 2008).6
Our data conﬁrm that this is largely the case in practice, but
any biases that emerge materially disfavor the more consistent large producers (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010; Bliege Bird
et al. 2012a; Bliege Bird and Power 2015). For a producer to
bias the consumption away from others based on kinship
would be offensive.7 How shares are nominally identiﬁed, as
well as who hands what shares to whom and how one can address someone regarding a share, are of course matters of kinship (think of the closest grandparental relationships, which
are same or parallel sections, vs. the most restrained in-law
relationships, which are orthogonal sections; Tonkinson 1991).
But this does not structure the composition of people present at
ngurra—where food is delivered, prepared, distributed, and
consumed—nor does it bias the amount and quality of who
consumes what (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010; Bird et al. 2013).
Martu claim that tiers of distribution ensure that all adults
present ultimately get an equal share, and it is the obligation of
the producer to act modestly—and the distributor compassionately—toward those with less (Bliege Bird and Power
2015).
there are often yumuri sharing a camp and sharing food that they or
others produce—they simply separate themselves in space. For example,
if out on a temporary camp, yumari will often separate themselves by at
least a few tens of meters, backs to each other and a brush divider or
vehicle between them. Yet yumuri are fundamentally family and fundamental to family in part, say Martu, because they share food at camp.
6. While for Martu, social interactions—including food sharing—
never exist independent of concerns about kinship relationships (in fact,
parcels of game are often referred to in terms of a kinship relationship
between a hunter and an idealized recipient of the share, e.g., a kangaroo
rump is often called the in-law share), kinship relationships do not
diametrically regulate the everyday ﬂows and amounts of food distributed from producers to consumers. Martu that we live with insist that
all of the adults present when food is distributed at a ngurra should
receive equal shares of food (or defer shares as they wish) regardless of
the kinship relationship between the producer and the consumer.
7. This is so even under broad obligations young men have to hunt
for their in-laws or other older men, especially a mother’s brother.
Younger Martu men often declare that afﬁnal obligations inﬂuence their
decisions to go hunting and that they have responsibilities to work for
old men and afﬁnal kin, but a young hunter almost never takes the lead
in cooking, butchering, or distributing large game. Distributions are
conducted by the most senior person present, and they do not bias
portions such that larger shares go toward afﬁnal kin or mother’s
brother of the hunter (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010). This does not mean,
however, that younger men do not have special responsibilities to their
in-laws or older men.

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

The obligations to ensure consumption equality emerge
through the way social status is maintained, which is mediated through the maintenance of social networks of sharing and cooperation. We have argued elsewhere that individuals are motivated to return as much food as possible to
the ngurra because they gain respect and some measure of
prestige from distributing a greater percentage of their harvest, as in kangaroo hunting (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010;
Bliege Bird 2012a) or, as in sand monitor hunting, that they
gain social capital from the costly support of extensive social
networks and an honest display of pecuniary disinterest, of
not beneﬁtting from one’s own overproduction (Bliege Bird
and Power 2015). The beneﬁts of costly sharing thus condition the return of all foraged foods to the dinner camp.
Martu are thus strict central place provisioners with respect
to the formation of the ngurra. Hunters very rarely eat while
searching for and pursuing prey and do not cook prey except
at the hearth in the ngurra. Even children return all prey back
to the ngurra for cooking before consumption. The only exception is the consumption of small amounts of fruit or nectar
while collecting or occasionally a snack if gutting larger game
at a kill site. This is not conditioned by the constraints of tools,
cooking pots, or other items left back at the central place:
nearly all foraged food Martu acquire is either eaten raw or
roasted whole over coals or in roasting pits. Ironically, the
formation of the ngurra trumps residential patterns in the
community at large. Martu are not strict central place provisioners with respect to the settlement; only what is not
consumed at the ngurra is brought back to the settlement.
Most of the small prey is thus consumed by the ngurra, while
only leftover portions of larger prey are brought back to the
community and redistributed. The formation of a ngurra is
determined simply by coresidence around a cooking hearth.
Those who share a cooking ﬁre are “at table” together regardless of their kinship relationships or residency in other
contexts (Bliege Bird et al. 2012a). They are made family.8
Martu family making includes the sharing of a multiplicity
of ties created through consubstantiality and rituals of unconditional economic exchange (Tonkinson 2011). “Consub8. This does not mean that all family are equal or that everyone who
is considered family gets an equal share. It is simply that those present
when food is prepared, distributed, and eaten are made family and get
an equal share (or have the right to refuse an equal share). Those not
present get nothing, or only what is not consumed immediately. In the
context of most foraging today, someone not present in a foraging party
(the group that makes a mirrka ngurra) cannot expect to get much of
anything that was acquired that day. They may be upset about that and
may address their concerns according to kinship (“I am your auntie, you
went foraging; why did you not bring me anything?”), but neither the
producers nor distributors control distribution in a way that would
ensure shares at a foraging camp are biased in order to return portions
to speciﬁc individuals in the settlement. One could defer consumption
of a share received at distribution and then deliver it to someone in the
settlement, but that is likely to raise questions from others in the settlement about perceived bias (see Bird et al. 2013).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

stantiality” refers to the possession of a common substance
as the basis of a social tie between two individuals. In some
societies, this is primarily the substance of genetic decent,
but in others, it also includes the shared intake of many
different substances. For Martu, family (walytja) is generated
through the sharing of one mother’s milk, the consumption
of the same hunted animal, or sharing souls or spirits that
have emerged from the same yinta, a spring with life-giving
water. Families are said to be established through sharing the
love of the same mother(s) who raised them as her own
children, sharing the same or parallel section (merged alternate generational groups: Karimarra and Panaka or Milangka and Purungu; Tonkinson 1991) or sharing material
without the expectation of return (yankupayi). It is not that
consanguinity is unimportant; it is that one can buffer questions about descent by creating social bonds through shared
experience and “substance,” and these bonds can be given
just as much weight as those characterized by clearly deﬁned
ancestry (Tonkinson and Tonkinson 2004). Being walytjamarri (those of us from the same spring, yinta) is about sharing, and it can be as much about sharing the same country,
meat, ﬁre, water, or mother’s milk as it is about sharing an
ancestor.
For Martu, decisions about foraging are thus shaped by
decisions about sharing. Martu often say they hunt to share:
hunting is always embedded in a context of social exchange.
When hunters leave ngurra thinking about yunkupayi
(sharing without expectation of return), they are said to bring
back more meat, and in bringing back more, the goal is not to
eat more but to share more to other members of the ngurra.
Sharing unconditionally is partly a manifestation of one of the
central emotions of Martu existence: sympathy, or sorrow
(nyarru). One shares with those less successful because one
feels sorry for them. Yet there is also a motivation to share to
receive the rewards of being mirtilya, a good hunter. Mirtilya
are skilled hunters who broker their excess production into
social capital. A hunter who produces more than anyone else
should eat as little as possible from his or her own production
and share the surplus widely and unconditionally, especially
to those with whom she has little obligation to share—those
who are not genealogical kin. A mirtilya has that status because she builds kinship ties with those to whom she is not
necessarily closely related. A productive hunter’s reward is not
the meat but the pukurrpa (happiness) that comes from
binding people together in a family through the meat they
have provided. This binding of family is kanyininpa, holding,
and it is simultaneously economic, parental, and ritual.
Among Martu, holding country requires that you feed and
nurture others without restricting their autonomy in any way:
shares are thus distributed in ways that defuse the “power of
the gift” (Mauss 1954). The power of the gift is muted in several ways typical of “immediate return economies” that disassociate the hunter with ownership of the food he or she has
acquired, create egalitarian distributions of economic goods,
promote tolerance of free riding, encourage cooperation, and

S73

discourage contingency in the sharing of food. Those who acquire more do not beneﬁt in consumption from their overproduction: better hunters share a larger proportion of their
harvest and do so routinely without contingent reciprocity in
food (Bliege Bird and Power 2015). However, the better hunter
who eats little, shares most, and cooperates extensively with
poor hunters does beneﬁt, and although we cannot measure
pukurrpa, we can measure the social networks of interaction
that are created through sharing. The beneﬁts of sharing lie in
the construction of social relationships of trust and cooperation
that build family ties. Those who are more generous on average
have higher centrality scores in the cooperative hunting network, meaning they cooperate more with others who are also
cooperative (Bliege Bird and Power 2015). More generous
sharers are thus able to create a social network of strong ties
between connected individuals. Where “generosity is the main
measure of a man’s goodness” (Hiatt 1982:14), building and
maintaining a reputation for virtue generates trust in many
different dimensions of Martu social life. Foragers share a
greater percentage of their harvest the larger it is, feeding and
holding those who cannot or will not forage for themselves. For
this is how Martu gain a measure of social prestige and become
respected as those strong in the law: through disengaging with
material property (Tonkinson 1988) and fostering egalitarian
material relationships in the holding of ngurra and walytja
(Bird and Bliege Bird 2010).

Emergent Pyrodiversity: “We Hunt in This
Country to Look After It. The Animals Get
Fat, and We Hunt and Eat Them.”
As expressed in the poem above, the notion that people are
critical for the perpetuation of life in the desert has parallels
with nonequilibrium theory in ecology, which recognizes the
importance of disturbance and the positive effects it can generate. When organisms disturb ecological communities, some
species experience population reductions, but others may do
better. If in inﬂuencing local population declines among a few
species an organism provides positive effects such as enhancing food or shelter for other species, they are referred to as
“ecosystem engineers” (Jones, Lawton, and Shachak 1996) or
“niche constructors” (Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman
2003). The classic example is that of beavers constructing dams.
Dams ﬂood creeks, which causes localized mortality to some
plants but increases wetland habitat and produces greater environmental heterogeneity, in turn supporting larger populations of a wider range of species at a landscape scale (Wright,
Jones, and Flecker 2002). Ecosystem engineers can have positive
effects through a variety of different mechanisms. They can
affect landscape heterogeneity, which may stabilize species interactions and provide a variety of habitats for shelter and
feeding (Holt 1984; Roff 1974; Roxburgh, Shea, and Wilson
2004); they may also increase food web stability simply by being
a predatory generalist who hunts prey at different trophic levels
(Gross et al. 2009). Organisms that play a key role in holding

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S74

Current Anthropology

communities together are often referred to as “keystone species”
or “foundational facilitators.” Remove that species and you may
precipitate a wave of extinctions that ripples through an entire
food web (Terborgh et al. 2001).
Like species, physical processes can act as keystone facilitators. Fire shapes global ecosystem patterns and is often a
keystone process, a form of disturbance that causes mortality
at local scales but may have positive effects at the scale of the
community or landscape (Bowman et al. 2009). At the scale of
a burned patch, ﬁre immediately removes vegetation and
reduces local animal populations, but it may increase in-patch
species diversity (alpha diversity) by interrupting the process
of plant succession that results in domination by a few competitive species. Communities associated with different time
since last ﬁre may have a very different set of plants and animals associated with them, and species diversity may actually
be highest not at the endpoint of recovery from ﬁre but at
some point in the middle. Across a landscape, ﬁre may increase diversity by increasing the heterogeneity of community
types across the landscape (beta diversity).
Across a vast landscape of nearly 500,000 hectares, Martu set
approximately 360 ﬁres per year, averaging around 100 hectares
in area. These hunting ﬁres are very different from lightning
ﬁres: they are ten times smaller on average and 10 times closer
to each other (Bliege Bird et al. 2012). Fires are smaller for a
number of reasons. Martu light ﬁres mostly under conditions
when ﬁre size can be more easily controlled. Under conditions
unfavorable to control of ﬁre, hunting ﬁres tend to be larger.
Lightning ﬁres are large regardless of conditions because they
tend to be lit mainly when temperatures are high and winds are
unpredictable. The size of lightning ﬁres is limited mainly by the
contiguity and amount of fuels, which is measured by antecedent cumulative rainfall (Bliege Bird et al. 2012). When the
grass is thick, Martu simply light more small ﬁres, because thick
grass reduces sandplain hunting search efﬁciency. The small,
patchy ﬁres scattered throughout the landscape by Martu
hunters have the incidental effect of creating ﬁrebreaks that
prevent the spread of lightning ﬁre during seasons when large
ﬁres threaten.
To explore the interactive effects of over 4,500 observed
foraging hours on the structure of the landscape and its interaction with resources, we stratiﬁed the entire study area by
different levels of human use, ranging from more than two
forager days per square kilometer to practically zero, and then
overlaid land-use intensity on a composite seral stage (vegetation age since ﬁre) classiﬁcation map (ﬁg. 3). The patchy
landscapes created through several years of wintertime hunting shown in ﬁgure 3 have signiﬁcant effects on the distribution of both plant and animal species. Sand monitor density
is increased in regions where there is greater environmental
heterogeneity: the higher the density of habitat edges—contrasts between new burns, regrowing vegetation, and old
growth—the higher the density of monitor lizards. In fact,
lizards are more abundant in landscapes where they are more
intensively hunted (Bliege Bird et al. 2013).

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

This increase in game, in turn, doubles Martu hunting efﬁciency and increases success rates six times over in more
heavily hunted regions compared with regions that are rarely
visited (Bliege Bird et al. 2013). As a result, foraging return
rates across all different hunting and gathering activities are
highest in areas under intermediate human use, where the
negative effects of human predation are dominated by the
positive effects of anthropogenic ﬁre (ﬁg. 4). Even in high-use
regions, foragers do signiﬁcantly better than they do in more
remote regions less affected by anthropogenic ﬁre.
Martu hunting ﬁres also shape population distributions of
other desert species that beneﬁt from access to a more diverse successional mosaic, such as hill kangaroo, which are
more abundant in regions associated with higher patch diversity (Codding et al. 2014). Characteristics of many of the
animal species that disappeared or are in decline also suggest
that they, too, may have been advantaged by Martu ﬁre
mosaics. Hare wallabies are browsers that rely on plants in
many different successional stages as well as mature spinifex
hummocks for nesting and predator predation. Before the
1960s, they were abundant and widespread throughout the
spinifex sandplains and were hunted frequently. The continued persistence of the population has been argued to be
dependent on continued patch mosaic burning to maintain
access to early-successional habitat adjacent to mature spinifex (Lundie-Jenkins 1993; Lundie-Jenkins, Corbett, and Phillips 1993; Lundie-Jenkins, Phillips, and Jarman 1993; see Kerle
et al. 1992 for similar effects in other endemic mammals).
Landscapes where hunting is most intense also have more
patches of midsuccessional grassland, which has a signiﬁcantly
greater density of high-ranked seed grasses such as Eragrostis
and fruits such as Solanum. Anthropogenic landscapes reduce
the cost of accessing such patches by rescaling habitat structure.
Foragers in an anthropogenic landscape have a 96% chance of
being able to ﬁnd a patch within 3 km; in regions far from
Martu inﬂuence, the chances of ﬁnding such patches nearby
drop to 82% (Zeanah et al. 2015). Essentially, an anthropogenic
landscape rescales resource patch density to reduce the cost of
accessing a wider range of resources.

Ecological Emergence of Homelands: “This
Country Is Us.”
In a very real sense, Martu foragers and their resources (especially sand monitor lizards) are locked in coevolutionary
dependence with deep temporal roots, one that is akin to
farming but on a spatial scale that requires more expansive
mobility than most systems of horticulture. This is so in spite
of (and in part because of ) the fact that contemporary foraging and mobility are entangled in and modiﬁed by extrinsic
markets and settler colonial constraints and opportunities.
The customary sector of a Martu economy thrives because of
the social value that Martu place in sharing: sandplain hunting is fundamental to sustaining relationships whose value
is deﬁned by pecuniary disinterest (Bliege Bird and Power

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

S75

Figure 3. Study region within the Martu homelands stratiﬁed by different levels of land-use intensity from more than 4,621 observed forager hours between 2000 and 2010. As illustrated in the lower graphic, the highest-use areas (category 4, black) include
those regions within a 25-km radius of Parnngurr with 12 forager days recorded per square kilometer. Moderately high-use areas
(category 3, dark gray) include those regions within a 50-km radius with between 0.26 and 2 forager days recorded per square kilometer. Moderately low-use areas (category 2, light gray) include all regions with between 0.06 and 0.25 forager days per square kilometer. Low-use areas (white) include those regions with !0.05 forager days recorded per square kilometer. The mosaics (shown to
scale in location in the lower graphic) are composite satellite images creating a cumulative 10-year ﬁre-history map (Bliege Bird et al.
2012b) to illustrate patchiness of seral stage (earlier succession is shown in lighter shades) according to use rank.

2015). For Martu this is fundamentally tied to pedestrian hunting in the sandplains and the burning that supports it.
High predictability and density of lizards is a necessary
precondition to produce desert livelihoods characterized by
reductions in residential mobility, the mid-Holocene hallmark of broad spectrum foraging economies in arid Australia
(Smith 2013). Even today, with vehicles and metal digging
sticks, hunters cannot be efﬁcient enough to support themselves or others without burning (see “Fire, Food, Family,
Home”; Bliege Bird, Codding, and Bird 2016; Zeanah et al.
2015). Such livelihoods can only be sustained through the
creation of a ﬁne-grained mosaic of diverse vegetative succession produced by the cumulative effects of anthropogenic
burning (Bliege Bird et al. 2008, 2012b). These anthropogenic
landscapes, however, are emergent phenomena: they are
maintained through attempts to increase the immediate efﬁ-

ciency of searching for small prey. The immediate beneﬁts of
burning to hunt offset the costs of collective action required
for intentionally designed systems of management (policing,
in effect) that characterize more intensiﬁed farming: Martu
“farm” lizards with “ﬁre sticks” (Jones 1969), but on a requisite spatial scale (supported by expansive logistical mobility
out from a residential base) that would make maintaining
long-term exclusive rites of producer control over a “cultivated” plot inordinately expensive. Ownership of land-based
estates is maintained in a delayed-return ritual economy
(Sutton 2003) in which the exclusivity of an estate is deﬁned
by the accumulation, performance, and inheritance of esoteric
knowledge, not directly through the maintenance of longterm rites to exclude access to a spatially bound set of resources cultivated through burning. The route to sustaining a
claim to an estate is indirectly linked to the maintenance of a

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S76

Current Anthropology

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

important keystone species and ﬁre is a keystone process. The
ritual signiﬁcance of burning is that Martu fulﬁll their role
within the food web by burning to acquire food and distributing it to the younger generation, holding them and in so
doing, holding the country for inheritance.10 Holding country
emerges naturally out of the holding of walytja, a group who
at the most local scale share ownership of “a little story” (see
“Emergent Pyrodiversity”), often a single yinta, or waterhole.
The patterning of ﬁres on the landscape is not designed toward some optimal management goal, it is simply meant to
be. If the mundane and ritual practices of life were not integrated, the land would not reproduce, and it would be the end
of the world.

Conclusions

Figure 4. Relationship between foraging efﬁciency (kcal per
forager hour, N p 1,831 foraging bouts) and intensity of land
use (see ﬁg. 3). Landscape heterogeneity increases as a result of
higher levels of anthropogenic burning in more intensively used
area (Bliege Bird et al. 2008, 2012b). This feeds back to increase
subsistence returns for pedestrian foraging in intermediate-use
regions. Even in the most intensively used areas (category 4), the
positive effects of an established mosaic of anthropogenic
burning outweigh the costs of localized resource depression
from more intensive extraction. Return rates from foraging
bouts in categories 2, 3, and 4 are all signiﬁcantly higher than
return rates in category 1 (P ! .05).

distinctive anthropogenic landscape through the way that skill
and generosity in hunting forge the rights of ritual performance and ownership (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010). These systems of social exchange thus emerge from the distribution of
resources across the landscape, which is fundamentally shaped
by anthropogenic ﬁre.9
Implicit within the Jukurrpa is the notion that the desert
supports a network of interactions between all species, what
ecologists refer to as a food web, in which humans are an
9. The status of being mirtilya (a skilled and generous hunter) is
dependent on a lifetime of holding others and building relational wealth
(sensu Mulder et al. 2009). This holding of others (kanyininpa), which
are bonds of trust, requires honest displays of asceticism, of devotion to
dispossession (Bird and Bliege Bird 2010; Bliege Bird and Power 2015;
Bliege Bird et al. 2012a). Paradoxically, it is through this dispossession
that a claim to possess an estate is maintained. The means of estate
inheritance are complex and vary geographically across desert societies
(Cane 2002; Dussart 2000; Myers 1986). For remote-living Martu, rights
to stake and maintain a claim to an estate and negotiate its performance
in ritual and artistic expression are in part based on respect generated by
how well you can bind together networks of co-owners (sensu Myers
1988). Hunting to share requires immediate returns that can only be
realized in landscape burning, the long-term (“emergent”) effects of
which are the distinctly anthropogenic landscapes that Martu call home.
That becomes the landesque capital of a delayed-return economy of
ritual inheritance.

Many Martu emphasize that the social, ecological, and metaphysical landscape exist simultaneously, inextricably intertwined in a complex web of interaction. Hunting in the sandplain grasslands is integral to the maintenance of this web and
ultimately sustains important networks of cooperation (Bliege
Bird and Power 2015; Bliege Bird et al. 2012a). Such hunting is
possible only within an environment where small animals
ﬂourish, which requires the intervention of human ﬁre sticks
(Bliege Bird et al. 2013). Fire makes possible high foraging
production, increasing both predictability and return rates in
hunting small animals. The foraging beneﬁts supplied by ﬁremaintained habitats are invested into social relationships via
food sharing. Fire sustains the generosity of the mirtilya (hunters with a lifetime of reputations based on skill and generosity)
and supports a moral economy that emerges from generosity,
which fosters stronger social ties between individuals by generating trust and facilitating cooperation.
Anthropogenic ﬁre sustains a web of interaction that links
the realms of the economic, the social, and the ecological. Fire
is the shaping of country, the reenactment of creation, and
the holding of Jukurrpa (the Dreaming), and it sustains the
ties that bind people together. In binding networks together
through sharing, Martu also serve as ecosystem engineers,
creating small-scale habitats that prevent the spread of very
large ﬁres and buffer small, ground-dwelling mammals from
both the effects of climate-driven ﬁre and from the heavy predation that ensues when animals are exposed in burned areas.
The logic behind the Dreaming places humans within the
web of ecological relationships critical to the coexistence of a
wide range of desert species, predicted the trophic collapse
that occurred during the Martu hiatus, and explains why
Martu understood species extinctions to be linked to the loss,
not the intensity, of human hunting. Once Martu began the
10. Similar themes are expressed in the burning of a vehicle to forge
trust in co-ownership: if there is a dispute over a vehicle, Martu will
burn the vehicle (e.g., Myers 1988). It is a display of commitments to
hold together networks of people and country made honest in your
ability to bear the burden of subjecting an object to destruction.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

mid-twentieth-century process of migration onto missions,
pastoral stations, and European settlements and stopped
hunting and burning on the landscape, ﬁre mosaics began
to break down, large ﬁres swept through, both invasive and
endemic predators spread and increased in population, and
many species of both plants and animals went extinct (Bliege
Bird, Codding, and Bird 2016; Bliege Bird et al. 2012b). The
world, as Martu knew it, did come to an end, as the Dreaming had predicted it would. The homelands came back to life
as Martu returned in the 1980s to hunt and burn. Dreaming
logic is thus revealed as a deep understanding of the socialecological relationships between human foragers and their
environments.
Rather than viewing Martu conceptions of “looking after
country” as management, we show here that what many
Martu mean when they talk about caring is that the long-term
beneﬁts of anthropogenic habitat modiﬁcation are an emergent property of a coevolved social-ecological system maintained by the short-term beneﬁts to small game hunting
returns. Positive environmental effects emerge not from designed or institutionalized management schemes but from the
cumulative patterning of individual decision making across a
landscape of social, residential, ritual, and economically driven
land-use patterns. People, and other species, then capitalize on
the ecological properties that emerge.
Our hope is that the analysis illustrates one way by which
anthropological disciplines can be reintegrated through questioning the mutual exclusivity of reductionist versus holistic
and emic versus etic perspectives. Our approach attempts to
isolate and break down some of the processes shaping emergent
properties of complex social-ecological systems while at the
same time contextualizing the transcendent worlds that people
construct from their relationships with each other, other species, and materials. Many Martu insist that they are their
country through their “holding” of people and land. One way to
interpret this is in how their practices construct networks of
relationships from which an ecological niche emerges. Things
in the niche are thus constituted not in delineated forms but in
the weave of interactions (Hodder 2012). “The environment,
then, comprises not the surroundings of the organism but a
zone of entanglement” (Ingold 2008:1796). We argue that measuring the interactions and the way they are recorded in habitat heterogeneity, including patterns of decision making about
food acquisition and the application of ﬁre to the landscape,
gives critical insight into the processes that hold together people
and their entanglements with country.

Acknowledgments
This work has been generously supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (BCS-1459880, BCS-0850664,
BCS-0314406, BCS-0127681), the LSB Leakey Foundation, and
Stanford University’s Woods Institute for the Environment.
We greatly appreciate Polly Wiessner and Agustin Fuentes for
their terriﬁc work in editing the contributions to this special

S77

issue and their integrative vision in organizing the WennerGren symposium, and we are grateful to them and all of the
conference participants for their inspiration, engagement, suggestions, and intellects. In addition, Laurent Dousset and an
anonymous reviewer greatly improved an earlier version of this
paper with many insightful comments and critiques. To all of
our Martu friends and family, we owe you our deepest gratitude for your tireless support and tutelage. Many of the artists at
Parnngurr, along with Gabrielle Sullivan and her devotion to
Martumili Artistis and John Carty’s insights, provided critical
guidance in our approach to Western Desert artistic expression.

References Cited
Altman, Jon, Nicholas Biddle, and Geoff Buchanan. 2012. The indigenous
hybrid economy: can the NATSISS adequately recognise difference? In
Survey analysis for indigenous policy in Australia: social science perspectives. Boyd Hunter and Nicholas Biddle, eds. Pp. 163–191. Canberra:
ANU.
Bird, Douglas W., and Rebecca Bliege Bird. 2010. Competing to be leaderless:
food sharing and magnanimity among Martu Aborigines. In The evolution
of leadership: transitions in decision making from small-scale to middlerange societies. John Kantner, Kevin Vaughn, and Jelmer Earkins, eds.
Pp. 21–49. Santa Fe, NM: SAR.
Bird, Douglas W., Rebecca Bliege Bird, and Brian F. Codding. 2009. In
pursuit of mobile prey: Martu hunting strategies and archaeofaunal interpretation. American Antiquity 74:3–29.
Bird, Douglas W., Rebecca Bliege Bird, Brian F. Codding, and Brooke A.
Scelza. Forthcoming. The dynamics of indigenous livelihoods and ecologies in the Western Desert: economic, social, and environmental values of
foraging in a remote Martu community. Journal of Rural Studies.
Bird, Douglas W., Rebecca Bliege Bird, and Christopher H. Parker. 2005.
Aboriginal burning regimes and hunting strategies in Australia’s Western
Desert. Human Ecology 33:443–464.
Bird, Douglas W., Brian F. Codding, Rebecca Bliege Bird, David W. Zeanah,
and Curtis J. Taylor. 2013. Megafauna in a continent of small game: archaeological implications of Martu camel hunting in Australia’s Western
Desert. Quaternary International 297:155–166.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, and Douglas W. Bird. 2005. Human hunting seasonality. In Primate seasonality: studies of living and extinct human and
nonhuman primates. D. Brockman and Carl van Shaik, eds. Pp. 243–266.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2008. Why women hunt: risk and contemporary foraging in a
Western Desert Aboriginal community. Current Anthropology 49(4):655–693.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, Douglas W. Bird, Brian F. Codding, Christopher H.
Parker, and James H. Jones. 2008. The “ﬁre stick farming” hypothesis:
Australian Aboriginal foraging strategies, biodiversity, and anthropogenic
ﬁre mosaics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
105(39):14796–14801.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, Brian F. Codding, and Douglas W. Bird. 2016. Holding
the dreaming: economic, social and ecological beneﬁts of hunting, sharing
and ﬁre in the Western Desert of Australia. In Why forage? hunters and
gatherers in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Brian F. Codding and Karen Kramer,
eds. Pp. 213–230. Albuquerque and Santa Fe: University of New Mexico
Press with School for Advanced Research Press.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, Brian Codding, Peter G. Kauhanen, and Douglas Bird.
2012a. Aboriginal hunting buffers climate-driven ﬁre-size variability in
Australia’s spinifex grasslands. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 109(26):10287–10292.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, and Eleanor A. Power. 2015. Prosocial signaling and
cooperation among Martu hunters. Evolution and Human Behavior
36:389–397.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca, Brooke A. Scelza, Douglas W. Bird, and Eric A. Smith.
2012b. The hierarchy of virtue: mutualism, altruism and signaling in
Martu women’s cooperative hunting. Evolution and Human Behavior 33
(1):64–78.
Borgerhoff Mulder, Monique, Samuel Bowles, Tom Hertz, Adrian Bell, Jan
Beise, Greg Clark, Ila Fazzio, et al. 2009. Intergenerational wealth trans-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S78

Current Anthropology

mission and the dynamics of inequality in small-scale societies. Science
326(5953):682–688.
Bowman, David M. J. S., Jennifer K. Balch, Paulo Artaxo, William J. Bond,
Jean M. Carlson, Mark A. Cochrane, Carla M. D’Antonio, et al. 2009. Fire
in the earth system. Science 324(5926):481–484.
Bowman, David M. J. S., Jennifer Balch, Paulo Artaxo, William J. Bond,
Mark A. Cochrane, Carla M. D’Antonio, Ruth DeFries, et al. 2011. The
human dimension of ﬁre regimes on earth. Journal of Biogeography 38
(12):2223–2236.
Brand Miller, Janette, Keith W. James, and Patricia Maggiore. 1993. Tables of
composition of Australian Aboriginal foods. Canberra: Australian Aboriginal Studies.
Cane, Scott. 2002. Pila Nguru: the spinifex people. Freemantle, Western
Australia: Fremantle Arts Center.
Carty, John. 2010. Drawing a line in the sand: the canning stock route and
contemporary art. In Yiwarra Kuju: the canning stock route. John Carty, C.
Davenport, and M. La Fontaine, eds. Pp. 23–77. Canberra: National
Museum of Australia.
Castree, Noel, William M. Adams, John Barry, Daniel Brockington, Bram
Büscher, Esteve Corbera, David Demeritt, et al. 2014. Changing the intellectual climate. Nature Climate Change 4(9):763–768.
Codding, Brian F. 2012. “Any kangaroo?” on the ecology, ethnography and
archaeology of foraging in Australia’s arid west. PhD dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Codding, Brian F., Douglas W. Bird, and Rebecca Bliege Bird. 2010. Interpreting abundance indices: some zooarchaeological implications of
Martu foraging. Journal of Archaeological Science 37:3200–3210.
Codding, Brian F., Rebecca Bliege Bird, and Douglas W. Bird. 2011. Provisioning offspring and others: risk-energy trade-offs and gender differences
in hunter-gatherer foraging strategies. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
278:2502–2509.
Codding, Brian F., Rebecca Bliege Bird, Douglas W. Bird, and David W.
Zeanah. 2016. Alternative Aboriginal economies: Martu livelihoods in
the 21st century. In Why forage? hunters and gatherers in the twenty-ﬁrst
century. Brian F. Codding and Karen L. Kramer, eds. Pp. 185–211. Albuquerque and Santa Fe: University of New Mexico Press with School for
Advanced Research Press.
Codding, Brian F., Rebecca Bliege Bird, Peter G. Kauhanen, and Douglas W.
Bird. 2014. Conservation or co-evolution? intermediate levels of Aboriginal burning and hunting have positive effects on kangaroo populations in
Western Australia. Human Ecology 42:659–669.
Cormier, Loretta A. 2003. Kinship with monkeys: the Guajá foragers of
Eastern Amazonia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Corning, Peter A. 2002. The re-emergence of emergence: a venerable concept
in search of a theory. Complexity 7(6):18–30.
Davenport, Sue, Peter Johnson, and Yuwali. 2005. Cleared out: ﬁrst contact in
the Western Desert. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies.
Descola, Philippe. 2013. Beyond nature and culture. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Dussart, Françoise. 2000. The politics of ritual in an Aboriginal settlement:
kinship, gender, and the currency of knowledge. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Elkin, Adolphus P. 1969. Elements of Australian Aboriginal philosophy.
Oceania 40(2):85–98.
Folds, Ralph. 2001. Crossed purposes: the Pintupi and Australia’s indigenous
policy. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Fuentes, Augustin. 2016. The extended evolutionary synthesis, ethnography,
and the human niche: toward an integrated anthropology. Current Anthropology 57(suppl. 13):S13–S26.
Gammage, Bill. 2011. The biggest estate on earth: how Aborigines made Australia. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Gould, Richard A. 1971. Uses and effects of ﬁre among the Western Desert
Aborigines of Australia. Mankind 8(1):14–24.
Gross, Thilo, Lars Rudolf, Simon A. Levin, and Ulf Dieckmann. 2009.
Generalized models reveal stabilizing factors in food webs. Science 325
(5941):747–750.
Hartigan, John. 2014. Aesop’s anthropology: a multispecies approach. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hiatt, Lester. 1982. Traditional attitudes to land resources. In Aboriginal sites:
rites and resource development. Ronald M. Berndt, ed. Pp. 47–53. Perth:
University of Western Australia Press.
Hodder, Ian. 2012. Entangled: an archaeology of the relationships between
humans and things. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Volume 57, Supplement 13, June 2016

Holt, Robert D. 1984. Spatial heterogeneity, indirect interactions, and the
coexistence of prey species. American Naturalist 124(3):377–406.
Ingold, Tim. 1996. Hunting and gathering as ways of perceiving the environment. In Redeﬁning nature: ecology, culture, and domestication. R. F.
Ellen and Katsuyoshi Fukui, eds. Pp. 117–155. Oxford: Berg.
———. 2008. Bindings against boundaries: entanglements of life in an open
world. Environment and Planning 40(8):1796.
Jones, Clive G., John H. Lawton, and Moshe Shachak. 1996. Organisms as
ecosystem engineers. Oikos 69:373–386.
Jones, Rys. 1969. Fire-stick farming. Australian Natural History 16(7):224–228.
Kerle, J. A., J. N. Foulkes, R. G. Kimber, and D. Papenfus. 1992. The decline of
the brushtail possum, Trichosurus vulpecula (Kerr 1798), in arid Australia.
Rangelands Journal 14(2):107–127.
Kohn, Eduardo. 2013. How forests think: toward an anthropology beyond the
human. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Latz, Peter K. 1995. Bushﬁres and bushtucker: Aboriginal plant use in Central
Australia. Alice Springs, Northern Territory: Iad.
Letnic, M., C. R. Dickman, M. K. Tischler, B. Tamayo, and C. L. Beh. 2004.
The responses of small mammals and lizards to post-ﬁre succession and
rainfall in arid Australia. Journal of Arid Environments 59(1):85–114.
Lundie-Jenkins, G. 1993. Ecology of the rufous hare-wallaby, Lagorchestes
hirsutus Gould (Marsupialia: Macropodidae) in the Tanami Desert, Northern Territory. 1. Patterns of habitat use. Wildlife Research 20(4):457–475.
Lundie-Jenkins, G., L. K. Corbett, and C. M. Phillips. 1993. Ecology of the
rufous hare-wallaby, Lagorchestes hirsutus Gould (Marsupialia: Macropodidae) in the Tanami Desert, Northern Territory. 3. Interactions with
introduced mammal species. Wildlife Research 20(4):495–511.
Lundie-Jenkins, G., C. M. Phillips, and P. J. Jarman. 1993. Ecology of the
rufous hare-wallaby, Lagorchestes hirsutus Gould (Marsupialia: Macropodidae) in the Tanami Desert, Northern Territory. 2. Diet and feeding
strategy. Wildlife Research 20(4):477–493.
Masters, P. 1996. The effects of ﬁre-driven succession on reptiles in spinifex
grasslands at Uluru National Park, Northern Territory. Wildlife Research
23(1):39–47.
Mauss, Marcel. 1954. The gift. New York: Norton.
Myers, Fred R. 1988. Burning the truck and holding the country: property,
time and the negotiation of identity among Pintupi Aborigines. Hunters
and Gatherers 2:52–74.
———. 1986. Pintupi country, Pintupi self: sentiment, place, and politics
among Western Desert Aborigines. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 2002. Ways of place-making. La Ricerca Folklorica 2002:101–119.
Odling-Smee, F. John, Kevin N. Laland, and Marcus W. Feldman. 2003. Niche
construction: the neglected process in evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Pianka, Eric R., and Stephen E. Goodyear. 2012. Lizard responses to wildﬁre
in arid interior Australia: long-term experimental data and commonalities
with other studies. Austral Ecology 37(1):1–11.
Roff, D. A. 1974. Spatial heterogeneity and the persistence of populations.
Oecologia 15(3):245–258.
Roxburgh, Stephen H., Katriona Shea, and J. Bastow Wilson. 2004. The
intermediate disturbance hypothesis: patch dynamics and mechanisms of
species coexistence. Ecology 85(2):359–371.
Scelza, Brooke A., Douglas W. Bird, and Rebecca Bliege Bird. 2014. Bush
tucker, shop tucker: production, consumption, and diet at an Aboriginal
outstation. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 53(1):98–117.
Sponsel, Leslie E. 2012. Spiritual ecology: a quiet revolution. Santa Barbara,
CA: ABC-CLIO.
Stanner, William E. H. 1979 (1953). White man got no dreaming: essays,
1938–1973. Canberra: ANU Research School of Social Sciences.
Sutton, Peter. 2003. Native title in Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Terborgh, John, Lawrence Lopez, Percy Nunez, Madhu Rao, Ghazala
Shahabuddin, Gabriela Orihuela, Mailen Riveros, Rafael Ascanio, Greg H.
Adler, and Thomas D. Lambert. 2001. Ecological meltdown in predatorfree forest fragments. Science 294(5548):1923–1926.
Tonkinson, Robert. 1988. Ideology and domination in Aboriginal Australia:
a Western Desert test case. In Property, power, and ideology, vol. 2 of
Hunters and gatherers. Tim Ingold, D. Riches, and J. Woodburn, eds. Pp. 150–
164. New York: Berg.
———. 1991. The Mardu Aborigines: living the dream in Australia’s Desert.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
———. 2005. Individual creativity and property-power disjunction in an
Australian desert society. Property and Equality 1(2005):32–46.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Bird et al.

Emergence and Pyrodiversity in Australia

———. 2007. Aboriginal difference and autonomy then and now: four decades
of change in a Western Desert society. Anthropological Forum 17:41–60.
———. 2011. Landscape, transformations, and immutability in an Aboriginal Australian culture. In Cultural memories. Peter Meusburger, Michael
Heffernan, and Edgar Wunder, eds. Pp. 329–345. Dordrecht: Springer.
Tonkinson, Myrna, and Robert Tonkinson. 2010. The cultural dynamics of
adaptation in remote Aboriginal communities: policy, values and the
state’s unmet expectations. Anthropologica 2010:67–75.
Tonkinson, Robert, and Myrna Tonkinson. 2007. Mardu. In Encyclopedia of
sex and gender. Pp. 625–634. Detroit: Macmillan Reference.
Walsh, Fiona. 2008. To hunt and to hold: Martu Aboriginal people’s uses
and knowledge of their country, with implications for co-management

S79
in Karlamilyi (Rudall River) National Park and the Great Sandy Desert,
Western Australia. PhD dissertation, University of Western Australia,
Perth.
Wiessner, Polly. 2016. The rift between science and humanism: what’s data
got to do with it? Current Anthropology 57(suppl. 13):S154–S166.
Wright, Justin P., Clive G. Jones, and Alexander S. Flecker. 2002. An ecosystem
engineer, the beaver, increases species richness at the landscape scale.
Oecologia 132(1):96–101.
Zeanah, David W., Brian F. Codding, Douglas W. Bird, Rebecca Bliege Bird,
and Peter M. Veth. 2015. Diesel and damper: changes in seed use and mobility patterns following contact amongst the Martu of Western Australia.
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 39:51–62.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.164 on September 26, 2019 03:54:05 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

