S314

Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Number S16, August 2017

Fire for a Reason
Barbecue at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel
by Ran Barkai, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, and Avi Gopher
Qesem Cave is a Middle Pleistocene site in Israel occupied between 420 and 200 ka. Excavations have revealed a wealth
of innovative behaviors most likely practiced by a new hominin lineage. These include early evidence for the habitual
and continuous use of ﬁre, the repeated use of a central hearth, systematic ﬂint and bone recycling, early blade production technologies, social hunting strategies and meat-sharing practices, and more. Fire was used throughout the
200,000 years of human occupation of the cave primarily for meat roasting and cooking. Roasting and cooking, we
argue, had an important role in providing the necessary caloric intake of the cave’s inhabitants. We see ﬁre as an
essential element of the new post-Acheulian human adaptation in the Levant. The ample recurring evidence for focused and repeated use of ﬁre for dietary purposes suggests that ﬁre production, control, use, and maintenance were
habitually practiced by the cave’s inhabitants and that ﬁre-induced calories became central for their survival. We
present an integrative view regarding the use of ﬁre at Qesem Cave and discuss the role of ﬁre within the framework
of the signiﬁcant cultural and biological transformations that took shape in the post-Acheulian Levant during the
Middle Pleistocene.

Introduction
The use of ﬁre at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave (Qesem) has
been discussed, and the repeated use of a central hearth at 300 ka
has been demonstrated in previous publications (Falguères et al.
2015; Karakanas et al. 2007; Shahack-Gross et al. 2014). In this
paper, our aim is to view the human use of ﬁre at Qesem in the
context of cultural and biological transformations that took
shape in the Levant at ca. 400 ka and to specify the major uses of
ﬁre at Qesem in particular and in the late Lower Paleolithic
period in the Levant in general. We claim that the common and
continuous use of ﬁre for roasting meat at 400 ka at Qesem was
a Rubicon crossed for the ﬁrst time, and it characterizes human
existence from that time to this very day. We contend that the
combination of speciﬁc circumstances during the late Lower

Ran Barkai is Associate Professor at the Institute of Archaeology of
Tel Aviv University (POB 39040, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel [barkaran
@post.tau.ac.il]). Jordi Rosell is Researcher in the Àrea de Prehistòria
of the University Rovira i Virgili (URV, Av. Catalunya 35, 43002 Tarragona, Spain) and the Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana I
Evolució Social (IPHES, Zona Educacional 4, Campus Sescelades URV,
Ediﬁci W3, 43007 Tarragona, Spain [jordi.rosellardevol@gmail.com]).
Ruth Blasco is Researcher at the Centro Nacional de Investigación sobre
la Evolución Humana (Paseo Sierra de Atapuerca 3, 09002 Burgos, Spain)
and Institute of Archaeology, Tel Aviv University (POB 39040, 69978
Tel Aviv, Israel [rblascolopez@gmail.com]). Avi Gopher is Professor at
the Institute of Archaeology of Tel Aviv University (POB 39040, 69978
Tel Aviv, Israel [agopher@post.tau.ac.il]). This paper was submitted
25 VII 16, accepted 20 I 17, and electronically published 17 V 17.

Paleolithic period in the Levant triggered human communities
to make use of their extensive cultural and social capabilities as
well as their profound familiarity with their environments and
their survival skills by using a new mode of adaptation. The use
of ﬁre for roasting meat and for cooking in general was a central
element of this new adaptation, and the evidence from Qesem is
consistent with this hypothesis. We start with a general introduction about the Acheulo-Yabrudian Cultural Complex (AYCC)
as reﬂected by the plethora of information gathered from the
archaeological deposits of Qesem. Then we focus on direct and
indirect evidence for the use of ﬁre at the cave (ash, hearths,
burned bones and lithics, stone tools used in butchering, and
charcoal contained in dental calculus). Finally, we present our
hypothesis regarding the earliest, continuous, and common use
of ﬁre for roasting meat and cooking and its implications to
human diet, culture, and adaptation.
The Acheulo-Yabrudian Cultural Complex and the
State of the Art of Qesem Cave Studies
The AYCC is a Middle Pleistocene, late Lower Paleolithic cultural entity of the Levant. The AYCC consists of three distinct
lithic industries: the Acheulo-Yabruidan (a ﬂake industry with
a notable presence of handaxes), the Yabrudian (a ﬂake industry dominated by Quina and demi-Quina scrapers), and the
Amudian (a blade-dominated industry; see Bar-Yosef 1994;
Copeland 2000; Rust 1950). Stratigraphically, the AYCC repeatedly postdates the Lower Paleolithic Acheulian and predates the
Middle Paleolithic Mousterian. The absolute chronology of the
AYCC covers a range of over 200 kyr between ca. 420 and

q 2017 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2017/58S16-0014$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/691211

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

200 ka (Barkai et al. 2003; Gopher et al. 2010). New thermoluminescence and electron spin resonance dates from Qesem
and Misliya Caves accord well with this range (Falguères et al.
2015; Mercier et al. 2013; Valladas et al. 2013). AYCC sites are
known from the central and southern Levant in both caves and
open air settings but mostly in caves or rock shelters.
Blade production in the Amudian industry is of special interest and is one of the major innovations of the AYCC (e.g.,
Bar-Yosef and Kuhn 1999). Middle Pleistocene blade production is a unique “ahead of its time” technological innovation that is part of a set of cultural and behavioral transformations that took shape in the Levant at ca. 400 ka and that
should be viewed as a local innovation that persisted for 200 kyr.
The Amudian industry is characterized by the systematic production of blades and tools made of blades. Alongside blade
production, a signiﬁcant ﬂake component also appears, including side scrapers in various frequencies (Copeland 2000; Jelinek
1982, 1990). Qesem has shown that the Amudian represents a
major industry of the AYCC, equivalent in scale to the other
known industries (e.g., Gopher et al. 2005; Shimelmitz, Gopher,
and Barkai 2011, 2015).
In the Yabrudian industry, the innovative appearance of the
Quina chaîne opératoire for the shaping of Quina scrapers (see
Bourguignon 2001) is of note. These distinctive scrapers are
well known from Middle Paleolithic Mousterian of Europe.
However, the Yabrudian is much older than the European manifestations of the Quina phenomenon. In the Levant, Quina
scrapers appear in large numbers in the AYCC Yabrudian (by
the thousands at Qesem and Tabun caves) but cease to appear
in post-AYCC Middle Paleolithic Mousterian sites. The fact
that Quina scrapers are not known from earlier Acheulian contexts makes their presence in the Yabrudian unique and quite
enigmatic.
As for the makers of the AYCC, this remains an open
question. The Galilee Man skull from Zuttiyeh Cave (Freidline
et al. 2012; Keith 1927; Zeitoun 2001) and the dental remains
from Qesem hint at a new, post-Acheulian, post-erectus hominin lineage in the Levant at ca. 400 ka (Ben Dor et al. 2011;
Hershkovitz et al. 2011). This statement is supported by new
studies of Middle Pleistocene skeletal remains, mainly dental
remains from the Levant and beyond (Le Cabec et al. 2013; Liu
et al. 2013; Rink et al. 2013), as well as genetic evidence suggesting a Middle Pleistocene (before 300 ka) date for the ancestors of modern humans and/or Neanderthals (e.g., Endicott,
Ho, and Stringer 2010; Mendez et al. 2013).
As for the use of ﬁre, the evidence indicates that human
use of ﬁre during the AYCC in the Levant was common and
relatively widespread (see a recent review in Shimelmitz et al.
2014). Earlier use of ﬁre in the Levant was reported at Gesher
Benot Ya‘aqov only (Alperson-Aﬁl 2017; Alperson-Aﬁl and
Goren-Inbar 2010; Goren-Inbar et al. 2004). Such “early ﬁre”
occurrences (Gowlett 2010), or the early interactions between
humans and ﬁre, are evident during the Early and Middle
Pleistocene in Africa and Asia (e.g., Berna et al. 2012; Chazan
2017; Gao et al. 2017; Gowlett et al. 2017; Hlubik et al. 2017).

S315

The turning point from “early ﬁre” to the habitual use of ﬁre
is a matter of dispute. Roebroeks and Villa (2011) describe
habitual use of ﬁre as a systematically repeated use of ﬁre in
speciﬁc sites and/or regions. Based on an increased number of
archaeological sites associated with evidence for ﬁre being extensively used in domestic contexts, they suggested that the
earliest habitual use of ﬁre occurred in Middle Pleistocene
(ca. 400–300 ka) Europe and southwest Asia. On top of that, the
probable use of ﬁre in the Acheulian was never demonstrated.
We argue that starting at ca. 400 ka, hearths were used, ﬁrst and
foremost, for roasting meat, and as a result, burned bones are
found in abundance in post-Acheulian sites (Fernández et al.
2012; Karkanas et al. 2007). Thus we concur with the statement
that during the Lower Paleolithic, Acheulian meat was most
probably consumed raw (Bar-Yosef 2006). As for the AYCC,
the evidence from Qesem presented below indicates an unequivocal change regarding the presence and use of ﬁre in archaeological sites from this point in time onward.
Qesem Cave
Qesem is located on the western slopes of the Samarian hills
some 12 km east of the Mediterranean at 90 m asl. With nearby
large springs and being located at the ecotone between the
swampy basins of the coastal plain to the west and the mountainous ridges of Samaria, this location provides a rich Mediterranean biome. To date, the excavation exposed some 70 m2
(130 m3) using 50 # 50 cm spatial units, full recovery through
a 2.4 mm net, and screen washing through 0.5–0.8 mm for
microfauna-bearing layers.
Qesem is a sediment-ﬁlled karstic chamber that became available to humans following slope erosion (Frumkin et al. 2009).
The stratigraphic sequence was divided into two major parts:
the lower consists of a 1 6.5 m accumulation of sediments with
clastic content, gravel, and clays, and the upper consists of 4.5 m
of cemented sediment with a large ash component. The lower
part was deposited in a closed karstic chamber, while the upper
part was deposited when the cave was more open, as indicated
by the presence of calciﬁed rootlets (Karkanas et al. 2007).
Qesem is a Middle Pleistocene (MIS 11-7) site dated by
various methods (over 100 dates) to between 420 and 200 ka
(Barkai et al. 2003; Falguères et al. 2016; Gopher et al. 2010;
Mercier et al. 2013). The whole stratigraphic sequence is assigned to the AYCC (Barkai and Gopher 2011, 2013).
Ongoing research at the site provides ample evidence of innovative behaviors. This pertains, for example, to serial blade
production (Shimelmitz, Gopher, and Barkai 2011), the acquisition of raw material for selected tool types from underground
sources (Verri et al. 2004), the production of Quina scrapers
using Quina debitage and retouch technologies (Lemorini et al.
2016), intensive and varied recycling of ﬂint and bone (Parush,
Gopher, and Barkai 2016; Rosell et al. 2015), group hunting
of prime-aged animals (mainly fallow deer; Blasco et al. 2014,
2016a), specialized butchering techniques and unique meatsharing habits (Stiner et al. 2009, 2011), intensive use of bone

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S316

Current Anthropology

retouchers, the habitual use of ﬁre, hearth-centered and spatially
patterned activities, and more—all well established at Qesem
and present throughout the cave’s sequence. Qesem contains
two of the three AYCC industries: the blade-dominated Amudian and the scraper-dominated Yabrudian. Viewing these two
as separate entities is at present challenged by data indicating
their coexistence at Qesem. Below we will present a summary
of the data on the lithics and human remains. The fauna will
be presented separately because it directly relates to understanding the use of ﬁre at the cave.
The Lithic Assemblage
While Amudian-bearing levels are dominant throughout the
cave’s stratigraphic sequence, the Yabrudian is less conspicuous
and is stratigraphically and spatially restricted. Raw-material
studies were oriented to both characterizing ﬂint types used and
locating their sources in the landscape. Preliminary results
show the use of a large variety of ﬂint types (over 80), some of
which were selected for speciﬁc types of tools or technological requirements. A concentration of over 10 geological sources
yielding ﬂint types used at the cave was found within 5 km of
the site. Several sources are, however, located some 15 km away
from the site (Wilson et al. 2016). Earlier raw-material studies
provided evidence for ﬂint procurement by both surface collection and quarrying from speciﬁc, designated primary subsurface sources (Verri et al. 2004, 2005). Quarried ﬂint was
directed toward the production of speciﬁc tool types (Boaretto
et al. 2009). It is of note that the AYCC of Tabun cave has items
made of ﬂint quarried from deep sources as well (Verri et al.
2005).
The Amudian blade industries provide very large samples.
Blade production at Qesem shows a full chaîne opératoire, including well-selected ﬂat ﬂint nodules, core shaping, and blade
production, use, and discard. Amudian blades were mostly used
for cutting, butchering, and deﬂeshing activities of soft tissues
and for a short time (Lemorini et al. 2006). Moreover, homogeneity in blade production technology and in blade characteristics was discerned throughout the Levant, reﬂecting a shared
AYCC template regarding the properties of the target blades
(Shimelmitz, Barkai, and Gopher 2016). Amudian blade production reﬂects a systematic, intensive, thoughtful, and straightforward technology—a conscious technological choice of skilled
ﬂint knappers constantly used for over 200 kyr (Shimelmitz,
Barkai, and Gopher 2016; Shimelmitz, Gopher and Barkai 2011).
Early blade industries were reported from Africa as well (Johnson and McBrearty 2010; Wilkins and Chazan 2012). The interrelations between these industries and the Amudian is intriguing in light of a multiple origins (convergent) hypothesis for
early Middle Pleistocene blade technology (Barkai and Gopher
2013; Wilkins and Chazan 2012).
Recycling ﬂint is a clear component of both Amudian and
Yabrudian assemblages at Qesem and in the AYCC as a whole
(e.g., Shimelmitz 2015). Detailed studies of recycled items and
recycling products indicate technologically well-established tra-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

jectories for the production of designated types of speciﬁc
sharp ﬂakes and blades (Assaf et al. 2015; Barkai, Lemorini, and
Gopher 2010; Parush et al. 2015; Parush, Gopher, and Barkai
2016) for targeted purposes (Lemorini et al. 2015). The scale of
recycling may reach almost 10% of the debitage at Qesem (the
highest densities may reach 180 recycled items per 1 m3; see
Gopher et al. 2016), and if recycled patinated items are added,
the frequency rises signiﬁcantly. Recycling is a well-established
behavioral feature characterizing the AYCC (as well as earlier
Acheulian technologies; see Agam, Marder, and Barkai 2015;
Barkai and Gopher 2013; Shimelmitz 2015) and is most probably oriented toward the intensiﬁcation of cutting activities.
As for tool typology, an “Upper Paleolithic” tool group made
on blades is conspicuous (Gopher et al. 2005). Large, wide, and
thick blades were selected for tool shaping, and laminar-shaped
items are dominated by a variety of retouched and backed items
with few end scrapers. Yabrudian assemblages show an abundance of Quina and demi-Quina scrapers making up to 50% of
the shaped items, while blades are less abundant.
A small group (n p 16) of shaped stone balls (spheroids/polyhedrons) was found concentrated in speciﬁc stratigraphic and
spatial Amudian contexts (Barkai and Gopher 2016). Whether
these were used for speciﬁc activities in speciﬁc contexts it is
too early to say. Biface production continued in the AYCC and
was quite conspicuous in the Acheulo-Yabrudian at Tabun.
Although bifaces are indeed marginal at Qesem and appear
as single items in both Amudian and Yabrudian assemblages
(Barkai and Gopher 2013), they seem to have been given special
attention. Bifaces appear in different stages—including roughouts. One of the outstanding roughouts is quite large (22 cm
long, 15 cm wide, 10 cm thick, and 3,285 g; see Barkai et al.
2013).
Archaeological evidence for knowledge transmission is
difﬁcult to attain. We have suggested a change in knowledgetransmission mechanisms between the Acheulian and the AYCC
in the Levant in relation to new adaptive strategies and innovations in the lithic sphere, to hunting techniques and butchering practices, to the habitual use of ﬁre (ﬁrewood collection, making and maintaining ﬁre), and especially to meat
(and maybe other foods) roasting and cooking (Barkai and Gopher 2013). These new AYCC behaviors necessitated knowledgetransmission mechanisms differing to a degree from those practiced in the Acheulian and supported by a new social milieu
based on a possible new sociocultural discourse (see Assaf, Barkai, and Gopher 2016; Barkai and Gopher 2013; Ben-Dor et al.
2011). A study of lithic knowledge transmission carried out at
Qesem recently relates to the technotypological characteristics
of a lithic assemblage from the southern parts of the cave
(earlier than 300 ka). The study of knapping trajectories demonstrated distinct features in this assemblage when compared
with lithic assemblages from other areas of the cave. These
features reﬂect various levels of knapping skills most probably
characterizing both skilled knappers and knappers in the process of learning. This may permit a preliminary assessment of
knowledge transmission relating to ﬂint knapping that has taken

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

place in a designated area (Assaf, Barkai, and Gopher 2016; Assaf
et al. 2015).
Human Remains
To date, Qesem has yielded dental human remains only;
13 teeth in total from different parts of the stratigraphic column. These included deciduous and permanent teeth of a number of individuals, many of whom were under the age of 20. The
basic morphometric study indicates that the Qesem teeth are
clearly not of Homo erectus (sensu lato). It has highlighted that
while some of the traits are more Neanderthal-like, they are
generally similar to the Late Pleistocene local populations
of Skhul and Qafzeh caves dated to ca. 100 ka, (Hershkovitz
et al. 2011, 2016). A 3-D scan of some of the teeth and various
subsequent analyses resulted in similar conclusions, although
Neanderthal afﬁnities were more emphasized in some of these
teeth (Fornai et al. 2016; Weber et al. 2016). While it is quite
conceivable that the Acheulian Cultural Complex of the Levant was created by H. erectus (sensu lato; see Barkai and
Gopher 2013 for details), the dental evidence from Qesem,
augmented by the AYCC skull from Zuttiyeh Cave, indicates a
new, post-Acheulian, post-erectus hominin lineage starting at
ca. 400 ka.
We thus see merit in our previous suggestions that the
Qesem ﬁnds and the AYCC as a whole were produced by a new
local human lineage. Obviously the question of why a biological change occurred in the Levant around 400 ka is of major
interest. Based on a bioenergetic model conjoined with the cultural transformations demonstrated at Qesem, we offer an explanation accounting for the demise of H. erectus and the appearance of a new, locally evolved, post-erectus human lineage
in the Levant around 400 ka (Ben-Dor et al. 2011). The model
suggests that the disappearance of elephants from the human
diet in the Levant around this time triggered a selection process
in favor of those who were better adapted to hunting larger
numbers of smaller, faster animals with high fat content—that
is, those who were lighter and more agile. The ingredients of
this model include well-known data such as the fact that the
elephant is a unique and ideal food package exploited by Lower
Paleolithic groups in the Levant for hundreds of thousands
of years. It is of note that no elephants are found in Levantine
post-Acheulian sites, which suggests this signiﬁcant part of
Acheulian life and diet had ceased in post-Acheulian times. Why
elephants disappeared from the human diet in post-Acheulian
times in the Levant remains an open question at the moment.
However, the fact that elephants are absent from all sites after the Lower Paleolithic implies that rather than a culturally
based avoidance or taboo, the most plausible explanation is
that elephants were, for some reason, no longer available. Additionally, modern humans have known and generally accepted
ceilings on protein and vegetal food consumption, and fat is
thus a compulsory component in the human diet for sufﬁcient
Daily Energy Expenditure (elephants are a notable package of
fat; see details in Ben-Dor et al. 2011). The habitual use of ﬁre

S317

for roasting and the new lithic technologies may be listed here
as two of the important new cultural elements related to this
transformative biological and socioeconomic landscape.
Qesem provides ample evidence on the environment, on
human behavioral and cultural adaptation, and on the biology
of the hominins that inhabited it. Sealed by sediment accumulation at ca. 200 ka, shortly after desertion, and exposed only
15 years ago, Qesem preserves an outstanding potential not
only for studying the communities that inhabited it but also for
understanding the AYCC as a whole and its place within the
sequence between two relatively intensively studied entities—
the Lower Paleolithic Acheulian and the Middle Paleolithic
Mousterian. While these two may be regarded as pan-Eurasian
phenomena, the AYCC is a local and distinct entity. Although
many of the AYCC lithic innovations do not continue into the
Mousterian and are replaced by Levallois-dominated industries, some of the most signiﬁcant cultural and behavioral innovative patterns of the AYCC do continue into later periods
(e.g., the habitual use of ﬁre, hunting focused mainly on large
and medium-sized ungulates, meat roasting, and more). The
AYCC, mainly in its early stage, demonstrates a revolution, so
to speak, reﬂecting a society open to innovative elements. New
lithic technologies appeared and were maintained for a period
of 200 kyr. Known concepts such as ﬂint recycling have been
modiﬁed, changed, and intensiﬁed. We view the emergence
of AYCC blade and Quina technologies in the Levant as an
original innovative behavior. The “African connection” of the
Qesem assemblages (lithic and faunal) is practically nonexistent, and it has no African counterparts. We suggest that systematic blade production and Quina-scraper production are
local innovations aimed at manipulating medium-sized game.
A study of Mousterian Quina scrapers from France (Claud et al.
2012) shows their use as butchering tools, and preliminary functional observations on the Qesem scrapers show similar results,
although hide working and bone working were observed as
well (Lemorini et al. 2016; Zupancich et al. 2016a, 2016b).
Amudian blades and Yabrudian scrapers, augmented by a variety of recycling products, may thus be viewed as components
of a new meat-cutting set that was developed in the Levant
around 400 ka, replacing the long-lived Acheulian meat-cutting
tool kit based on ﬂakes and handaxes. This may have accompanied new hunting and meat-sharing practices following the
loss of calories previously obtained from elephants. This particular combination of blades and Quina scrapers (as well as
recycled products) reﬂects a speciﬁc adaptation that has no
counterparts in Africa or Europe.

Fire Use at Qesem
The use of ﬁre is apparent throughout the sequence at Qesem,
both directly by the large amounts of wood ash and the presence of hearths (Karkanas et al. 2007; Shahack-Gross et al.
2014) and indirectly by the large amounts of burnt ﬂint and
burned bones, the organization of activities around the hearth,
and the presence of charcoal fragments in human dental cal-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S318

Current Anthropology

culus. Thus, it is our contention that ﬁre was used habitually,
commonly, and repeatedly as early as 400 ka, and one of its
most important functions was most likely cooking (see Speth
2012). This section presents this evidence in some detail.
Direct Evidence for Fire Use
The direct evidence from Qesem clearly indicates extensive,
repeated use of ﬁre between 420 and 200 ka. Micromorphological and isotopic evidence indicates recrystallization of wood
ash. Large quantities of burnt bone, characterized by a combination of microscopic and macroscopic criteria, and moderately heated soil lumps are closely associated with the wood
ash remains (Karakanas et al. 2007). All the ash structures are
related to wood burning and complete combustion. Calcined
bones are relatively common as identiﬁed, both mineralogically
(using the Fourier Transform Infared Spectrometry [FTIR])
and microscopically, by changes in color, birefringence, chemical alteration, and interference colors. Such a mineralogical
transformation occurs at either a very high temperature for a
short duration (above 6507C) or from prolonged combustion at
temperatures as low as 5007C. This temperature range is commonly reached in campﬁres, and in the case of Qesem, calcined
bones are mainly found in the area where the ﬁreplace is located
(see below).
A major component of the Qesem deposits consists of recrystallized wood ashes. The upper ca. 4.5 m of the sequence
consist mainly of anthropogenic sediments characterized by
completely combusted, mostly reworked wood ashes associated with large amounts of burnt bone, lithic artifacts, and
moderately heated soil lumps. The strong cementation of the
deposits is explained by calcite that precipitated from dripping
waters and the recrystallization of the ash. The isotopic analysis supports the presence of both preserved and recrystallized
wood ash in the sediments (Karakanas et al. 2007).
A central hearth was identiﬁed during ﬁeldwork and conﬁrmed later by mineralogical and microscopic criteria. Micromorphological evidence shows two superimposed use cycles
each composed of shorter episodes, possibly the earliest superimposed hearth securely identiﬁed to date (Shahack-Gross et al.
2014). The hearth covers ca. 4 m2, making it a uniquely large
hearth in comparison with any contemporaneous hearth identiﬁed thus far. The hearth is located in the center of the cave and
is associated with butchered animal remains and a dense ﬂint
assemblage. The central location of the hearth within the cave
and the activities associated with it may reﬂect a pattern of the
organization of space by the cave inhabitants. An array of independent lines of evidence was used to analyze this large,
central, repeatedly used combustion feature. The evidence for
this feature being a hearth is primarily the two microlaminated
gray-white layers composed of in situ wood ash that includes
charred and calcined bones, microcharcoal, burnt ﬂint, and
burnt microscopic clay aggregates. The micro-FTIR data indicate a temperature range that exceeded 5007C (ShahackGross et al. 2014). This central hearth—having a uniquely large

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

size, being superimposed, and bearing dense faunal and lithic
remains as well as evidence for spatial differentiation of activities around it—provides a glance into ﬁre-related behavior of
Middle Pleistocene humans. The sedimentary sequence postdating this hearth at Qesem is characterized by a high content
of ash. It is clear that the Qesem hominins possessed ﬁre in the
sense of a maintainable technology. They built campﬁres inside
the cave, and a variety of activities were conducted in the vicinity of these ﬁreplaces. The ash-rich contents of the upper
strata as well as the abundant burned remains in the lower
strata indicate many ﬁre-building events, supporting the interpretation of habitual use of ﬁre in the cave.

The Faunal Assemblage
The Qesem faunal record is extremely rich in all of the layers
and is dominated by fallow deer but includes red deer, horse,
aurochs, wild pig, and wild ass. Although rare, small ungulates
such as goat and roe deer and small prey such as birds are also
present (Blasco et al. 2014, 2016a; Sánchez-Marco et al. 2016;
Stiner, Gopher, and Barkai 2009 2011). Among the small prey,
tortoises show a slightly higher level of representation (Blasco
et al. 2016b). The faunal assemblages are characterized by an
extremely rare presence of carnivores (Blasco et al. 2014, 2016a;
Stiner, Gopher, and Barkai 2009, 2011). A signiﬁcant amount
of anthropogenic bone damage has been detected throughout
the stratigraphic sequence, including its earliest levels. The
taphonomic characteristics of faunal remains indicate that all
assemblages were generated solely by humans occupying the
cave and were primarily damaged by their food-processing activities. The ungulate mortality proﬁle is dominated by adult-aged
individuals, and in the case of fallow deer, the relative abundance of infantile and young individuals suggests the development of seasonal hunting episodes (Blasco et al. 2014, 2016a;
Stiner, Gopher, and Barkai 2009, 2011).
Different types of butchery cut marks have been identiﬁed in
the form of incisions, sawing marks, scraping marks, and chop
marks (ratios between !2% and 12% according to Blasco et al.
2014, 2016a, and Stiner, Gopher, and Barkai 2009). The ungulate specimens show cut marks distributed over most of the
skeletal elements, especially on limb bones (ﬁg. 1). The locations of the cut marks indicate that both long-bone epiphyses
and shaft fragments bear cuts, although there is a clear predominance of damage on limb-shaft fragments. Tortoise bones
from the earliest levels show a relatively high rate of cut marks
(13.2%) on the shell and limbs (Blasco et al. 2016b).
The faunal assemblage also includes damage caused during
bone breakage to access marrow (ﬁg. 2). The studied samples
have preserved diagnostic elements of intentional bone breakage of both long and ﬂat bones, although, as in the case of cut
marks, the limb shafts show the highest proportions of damage.
The bone surface modiﬁcation resulting from the anthropogenic breakage includes percussion pits, notches, impact ﬂakes
(cortical ﬂakes and scars included), counterblows, and peeling.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

S319

Figure 1. Examples of burned bones bearing cut marks from the hearth faunal assemblage (A–E) and the earliest levels of the cave
(F–H). A, Long-bone fragment of a small-sized animal showing “sandwich” coloration. B, Long-bone fragment with double coloration
on the same surface. C, Proximal epiphyses of metapodial bones. D, Different burning tonalities on the same bone surface. E, Costalbone fragment of tortoise showing burning (degree 3) on the dorsal surface while ventral surface remains unburned. Long-bone
fragments of small-sized animals with degree 2 (F ), degree 5 (G), and double coloration (degrees 0 and 3; H). A color version of this
ﬁgure is available online.

Nine bone fragments from the hearth unit and 15 from earlier
levels show percussion marks related to the shaping of stone
tools. All of these items correspond to the long-bone shafts of
small, medium, and large animals, showing damage typically

caused by the use of bone as a retoucher (Blasco et al. 2013a;
Rosell et al. 2015).
Burning damage affects more than 30% of the bone fragments in all assemblages, including the earliest ones (ﬁgs. 1, 3).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 2. Experimental marrow removal through hammer-stone percussion (top) and fossil examples of damage generated during
bone breakage to extract marrow in form of percussion notches on limb bones from the hearth assemblage (A), area around the
hearth (B), and area under the shelf (C) at Qesem Cave (bottom). A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

S321

Figure 3. Experimental examples of roasting meat (left) and experimental example of calcined bones (degree 5) after being thrown to
the hearth for cleaning (right). Note the calcined bones become more fragile and susceptible to breakage, a circumstance leading to
their fragmentation and destruction in some cases. A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.

In the case of the central hearth, this ﬁgure rises to 63.95% of
the specimens (Blasco et al. 2014). For the study of this speciﬁc
modiﬁcation, macroscopic criteria based on color changes have
been used. According to several authors, two main variables
seem to inﬂuence coloration, namely, the heat intensity and the
exposure time (e.g., Brain 1981; Buikstra and Swegle 1989; Gilchrist and Mytum 1986; Johnson 1989; Mayne 1997; Nicholson
1993; Shahack-Gross, Bar-Yosef and Weiner 1997; Shipman,
Foster, and Schoeninger 1984; Spennemann and Colley 1989;
Stiner et al. 1995). The different responses of the organic and
inorganic components of the bones to the rise in temperature
lead to color changes and different chromatic stages (mainly
brown, black, gray, and white; e.g., David 1990; Grayson et al.
1988; Lyman 1994). For Qesem, the degree of alteration due to
burning has been classiﬁed into six categories of intensity according to the bones’ color, structure, and homogeneity, with
degree 0 representing unburned and degree 5 representing calcined bones. “Sandwich” coloration has also been detected at
Qesem, characterized by different coloration in the intracortical tissue with respect to that observed on the outer sides. This
occurs when the skeletal element is subjected to partial thermal
action or incomplete combustion while maintaining its fat content (Cerdá, García-Prósper, and Serra 2005).
Thermal alteration has been observed on every type of skeletal element, albeit with a deﬁnite predominance on the longbone shafts of medium- and small-sized ungulates. Degree 3
represents the most abundant damage, followed by degree 2,
while degrees 1 and 5 are the least represented (Blasco et al.
2014, 2016a; Stiner, Gopher, and Barkai 2011). Some specimens
bear “sandwich” coloration predominantly on the long bones.
The presence of burning on bone fragments might reﬂect
several phenomena. The challenge is certainly to identify roasting (e.g., Alhaique 1997; Solari et al. 2015; Speth 2006), as other
intentional processes could lead to burning, such as the removal
of waste for cleaning purposes (e.g., Yravedra and Uzquiano

2013), the use of bone as fuel (Morin 2010; Théry-Parisot 2002),
the preparation of bones to facilitate their breakage (Caceres
et al. 2002), or the preparation of bone marrow for removal
(Oliver 1993; Speth et al. 2012). Burned bones could also be the
unintended (accidental) consequence of postdepositional damage such as secondary burning when ﬁreplaces are set up on
bones buried close to the surface (e.g., Aldeias 2017; Bennett
1999; Stiner, Kuhn, and Surovell 2001).
The task becomes complicated when several of these processes occur during the formation of the same sedimentary
package. The superposition of different processes could mask
the initial hominin activities, such as the roasting of meat before
deﬂeshing. As in the case of tortoises, we have tried to detect
differential burning patterns on ungulate bones, that is, double
colorations on the cortical surface and no alteration on the
medullary surface, as it is expected that if bone is exposed when
meat is on the ﬁre for roasting, the medullary surface will remain unchanged and the exposed areas (or those covered by
only a thin meat layer) will be affected more intensely by the
heat, thus acquiring a higher degree of coloration (Gabucio
et al. 2014; Gifford-Gonzalez 1989; Rosell et al. 2012). Despite
complexities, a pattern based on the absence of burning on
the medullar surface of ungulate limb bones was observed at
Qesem. This pattern appears on bones that do show heat alteration (uniform or double coloration) on their cortical surfaces
(7.32% of specimens bearing differential burning patterns from
the hearth archaeological context). In addition, some of these
bones (2.1%) show a higher degree of burning on those parts that
would normally be exposed to ﬁre when bone is placed on the
embers to roast the meat adhering to it (e.g., metaphysis). This
fact has been interpreted as the result of episodes related to
roasting.
The roasting “signal” could be viewed as weak if we assume
that only one ﬁre-related activity occurred in the cave. However, the development of a single activity is unlikely to be iden-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S322

Current Anthropology

tiﬁed for the following reasons: (1) the presence of burned
bones over the entire excavation surface and volume, (2) alterations affecting all bone surfaces (both medullar and cortical), (3) structural changes of the bone tissues resulting from
intense exposure to ﬁre (e.g., ﬁssures, cracking, shrinkage), and
(4) signiﬁcant concentration of burned material in the area of
the ﬁreplace (which includes the highest degrees of thermal
alteration [calcined bones degrees 4, 5]). In relation to this,
Mentzer (2009) proposes that the bone fragments become
completely calcined when they are directly exposed to ﬂame.
This might occur when bones are thrown into the hearth for
cleaning (Yravedra and Uzquiano 2013), when ﬁreplaces are set
up on unburied or semiburied bones (Bennett 1999), or when
bones are used as fuel (Costamagno et al. 2009). As noted in
Blasco et al. (2016b:204), these possibilities are not mutually
exclusive, as many processes may have occurred concurrently
or sequentially, leading to the overlapping of bone alterations
and even to the destruction of elements or signatures after a
speciﬁc primary human activity. For example, some burned
bones show no homogeneous degree 2 coloration (brown),
which coincides with alterations described by Bennett (1999)
of specimens burned after burial, indicating nonnutritive episodes that occurred following the processing sequence. The set
of thermal alterations at Qesem certainly shows the complexity
of its taphonomic history, where more than one ﬁre-related
process, roasting included, seem to have occurred.
The case of Testudo sp. is particularly signiﬁcant because
52.9% of the burned tortoise bones from the central hearth
showed thermal alteration on different surfaces, and the highest
degree of burning was observed on the dorsal surfaces. This
pattern was especially pronounced in the earliest levels of the
cave, as 83.33% of the double-colored bones showed a higher
degree of burning on the dorsal than on the ventral surface,
which tends to appear unburned (Blasco et al. 2016b). Although
a certain degree of variability is to be expected, this pattern ﬁts
well with the idea of roasting tortoises by placing the whole
animal upside down directly on the embers and allowing it to
cook in the shell. These taphonomic patterns can be used as
examples of new human-fauna relationships during the AYCC,
which include cooking as a regular component of the human’s
behavioral repertoire.
The Organization of Human Activities around the Central
Hearth: The Faunal and Lithic Evidence
Spatially, the central hearth is an evident focus of intensive
activities and is very dense in both faunal and lithic ﬁnds. We
focus on the hearth itself and the area adjacent to it to the south,
which seems to be related to the hearth (Blasco et al. 2016a;
Shahack-Gross et al. 2014). A preliminary spatial analysis of
faunal remains in this area has recently been attempted (Blasco
et al. 2016a), and the lithic spatial distribution is under study.
The abundant thermally altered items lead us to infer a wellimplemented use of ﬁre at Qesem through its whole stratigraphic sequence. The central hearth area has been used here

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

as a model to analyze and elucidate this behavioral pattern
(Blasco et al. 2014, 2016a). The succession of cycles of combustion at the same location in the cave suggests a repeated
behavior and a patterned use of space during recurrent human
occupations. This resulted in a signiﬁcant quantity of faunal
and lithic remains as well as evidence of the spatial differentiation of activities around the hearth. The hearth and the area
south of it cover an area of approximately 15 m2 excavated to a
maximum depth of 60 cm. The faunal assemblage comprises
37,304 specimens (2,995 specimens, or 8.03%, have been identiﬁed to the species level) of which 15,464 come directly from
the hearth and 21,840 from surrounding zones. The faunal
assemblage includes 15 taxa and a minimum number of individuals (MNI) of 81 (fallow deer MNI p 41, red deer MNI p 8,
horse MNI p 6, aurochs MNI p 5, wild pig MNI p 3, wild
ass MNI p 3, rhinoceros MNI p 2, goat MNI p1, roe deer
MNI p 2, large bird MNI p 3, Carnivore MNI p 1, Cervidae
MNI p 2, and the tortoise MNI p 4; Blasco et al. 2014, 2016a).
Perhaps one of the best examples of spatial differentiation
is the plot based on the size of bone fragments in the assemblage and the degree of thermal alteration of the bones. Density
maps were generated using geographic information systems
(ArcGIS 10) and include proximity calculations such as kernel
estimation or the nearest neighbor algorithm (see details in
Blasco et al. 2016a). Burned bones, mainly those showing a
higher degree of damage (degrees 4 and 5), are clustered in the
main combustion area. In contrast, the area around the hearth
makes up less than 1% of the total number of specimens retrieved with this degree of damage (Blasco et al. 2016a). This
apparent organization of the remains is most obvious if we consider the length of the bone fragments. Although the smallest
specimens (!20 mm, the most abundant in the assemblage)
are distributed over the entire occupied surface, the highest
concentration is observed in the hearth area. Yet a most signiﬁcant observation is the distribution of large bone fragments
(140 mm) in the outer area (Blasco et al. 2016a). This spatial
distribution seems to ﬁt roughly with the model of cultural
formation of hearth-related assemblages observed by Binford
(1978, 1983) in Nunamiut camps. The drop area is characterized by small bone splinters and lithic fragments resulting from
different domestic activities, such as bone breakage for marrow
extraction or the processes of core reduction and stone tool
shaping. The toss zone, in contrast, consists of larger fragments
that have been intentionally tossed away to areas farther removed from the activity areas. On this basis, a tentative standardized pattern can be observed along the sedimentary formation of the hearth. Both the spatial distribution around the
hearth and the subsistence strategies can be considered as factors linked to the emergence of reference places of a residential
character—that is, places that would ﬁt with the concept of the
home base discussed by Rolland (2004).
Results of spatial density data based on a study of lithics at
18 assemblages throughout the stratigraphic column and in
different parts of the cave included the ﬁreplace area and the
area to its south (see Gopher et al. 2016). When lithic densities

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

of the hearth area and the area to the south of it are compared
with the studied assemblages throughout the cave or, more
speciﬁcally, with four assemblages of similar stratigraphic position and roughly contemporary, some interesting results are
evident. The lithic assemblage of the hearth area consists of
18,837 items and shows the highest density of all the assemblages of the cave (6,144 lithic items per m3 for the hearth itself; see Gopher et al. 2016), indicating intensive lithic production, use, and discard in this area. This is reﬂected in the
relatively high density of cores and core trimming elements
(CTEs) as well (61 and 121 per m3, respectively). The area to the
south of the hearth is somewhat lower in density (3,106 items
per m3) but shows high densities of cores and CTEs (37 and
63 per m3, respectively). A conspicuous aspect of the hearth
area and the area south of it is the high density of cutting tools,
including blades and naturally backed knives (NBKs) made on
blades (both showing a density of 77 per m3) as well as NBKs
made on ﬂakes that are prominently dense in the area (98 per
m3). Another outstanding aspect is the fact that the highest
density of recycling is evident in the hearth area, including both
the recycled “parents” and the recycling products (45 and
142 per m3, respectively), and south of the hearth (32 and
134 per m3, respectively). Many of the products of recycling
have shown meat-cutting use wear (Lemorini et al. 2015), and
the relatively high density of blades and NBKs (Lemorini et al.
2006) in this area suggests that they could be interpreted as a
set of meat-cutting tools (Barkai, Lemorini, and Gopher 2010)
densely concentrated at the meat-roasting area. Interestingly,
the hearth shows a medium-low density of shaped items (tools),
while the area south of the hearth shows a very low density of
shaped items. This may indicate a frequent use of unshaped
items (mostly characterized by sharp edges) in the hearth area
and south of it. We may add that while blades and other cutting
tools (including recycling products) are conspicuous in the
hearth assemblage itself and the area south of it, assemblages
of similar stratigraphy to the west and northwest of the hearth
are poorer in blades and NBKs, poorer in recycled items and
recycling products, and richer in shaped tools, including a conspicuously high density of scrapers (27–43 scrapers per m3
compared to 6 and 5 scrapers per m3 in the hearth and the area
to the south of it). This may indicate the use of blades and of
recycling products in some areas around the hearth while
scraper-related activities have taken place in other distinctive
and separated (though nearby and contemporaneous) areas of
the cave.
Inhaled Charcoal in Dental Calculus
Potentially inhaled and ingested materials were extracted from
dental calculus of the Qesem humans, including, among other
things,microcharcoal, starch molecules, and Pinus pollen. These
ﬁnds offer an insight into human diet and the environment
around the cave, and the microcharcoal highlights the need
for smoke management in the enclosed environment of the
cave—a challenge introduced after adopting the habitual use

S323

of ﬁre for roasting/cooking by the Qesem humans. Charcoal microparticles up to 70 mm in diameter enter the mouth
during oral breathing, and while these fragments could also
result from ingestion of char adhering to roasted food, their
size suggests they result from accidental inhalation (Hardy et al.
2016). These ﬁndings, combined with the sedimentary and micromorphological evidence from the cave, are indicative of
ﬁre and suggest a smoky atmosphere inside the cave. While
placing the hearth in a central place well inside the cave may
be linked to the increased intensity of roasting/cooking, ﬂint
knapping, animal processing, and most, presumably, social interactions, the need for smoke management became necessary.
A smoky atmosphere can be an irritant and can at times cause
serious health problems. Smoke can cause coughing and eye
irritation in addition to potentially more serious lung problems. For a successful use of ﬁre to develop in an internal (cave)
location and fulﬁll its potential functional and social purposes
in a way that permitted the population to thrive, the health risks
must be resolved.

Discussion and Conclusions
The Late Lower Paleolithic period in the Levant, and the AYCC
in particular, was a period of transformation in human biology
and culture. The habitual, common, and repeated use of ﬁre
for roasting meat (and possibly cooking in general) should be
conceived as an integral part of this set of transformations
rather than an isolated phenomenon. We believe that a better
acquaintance with the environmental, behavioral, and adaptive
contexts of the use of ﬁre at ca. 400 ka in the Levant will promote comprehension of this new aspect and its signiﬁcance in
human evolution.
We claim that in the AYCC starting sometime at 400 ka, the
use of ﬁre was clearly aimed at meat roasting and possibly
cooking in general, and this innovation continued in the Levant after the AYCC (see a statement on cooking as a Eurasian
Middle Pleistocene innovation in Dennell 2009:476–477). A
detailed discussion of the sociocultural aspects of ﬁreplaces
as central foci of human activity is beyond the scope of this
paper (see Wiessner 2014), but the fact that a central hearth
was exposed is of major importance in this respect. The use of
ﬁre at Qesem is ﬁrst and foremost related to the dietary
practices of the cave’s occupants. The diet of the Qesem inhabitants had a major meat component as reﬂected in the large
number of animal bones and the dietary reconstruction we
suggested (Ben-Dor et al. 2011). While ﬂoral remains were not
preserved, we succeeded in extracting ingested ﬂoral remains
from human dental calculus, including starch granules and
chemical compounds, providing a direct link to ingested plant
food containing essential nutrients, including polyunsaturated
fatty acids and carbohydrates (Hardy et al. 2016). Following
the sources on which we based our “fat hunter” model, a human diet based on meat and fat must have been complemented
by carbohydrates and thus included three major ingredients:
animal proteins, animal fat, and vegetal food. We have no

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S324

Current Anthropology

doubt concerning vegetal food consumption in the Paleolithic
(e.g., Melamed et al. 2016), and the above-quoted study supports this view, providing direct evidence for the consumption
of vegetal food. A point in order here are results of a study of
masticatory wear patterns on human teeth carried out recently
that provided evidence suggesting that the Qesem people possessed a strong masticatory system and fed on a wide range of
food types (Sarig et al. 2016).
A major element in our argument has to do with the absence
of elephants from AYCC sites. Elephants were part of the diet
of Acheulian humans, and elephant bones, alongside other
taxa, were found in Acheulian sites in the Levant throughout
the 1-million-year span of the Acheulian Cultural Complex in
the region. Elephant bones are present in early, middle, and
late Acheulian sites (Ubeidya, Evron, Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov,
Revadim, and Holon, respectively), and thus we may say that
Acheulian human presence in the Levant is constantly associated with elephants and their use as a source of food. It is
of course possible that elephants were not consumed at every
Acheulian site and that in certain times and at certain places,
Acheulian humans in the Levant survived with no elephant
meat and fat on the menu. However, this was the exception
rather than the rule. Sites of the AYCC as well as later sites in
the Levant lack elephant remains. No elephant bones were
found at any post-Acheulian site in the Levant, and they were
not part of the post-Acheulian human diet, which was based
on medium-sized, prime-aged animals both in the late Lower
Paleolithic AYCC and the later Middle Paleolithic Mousterian
(e.g., Speth 2012).
The signiﬁcant changes in human behavior during the AYCC
necessitated new knowledge-transmission mechanisms in order to cope with the many new aspects of behavior adopted. In
addition to the production of ﬂakes and bifaces, AYCC humans had to learn how to produce blades and Quina scrapers
following strict standards. Moreover, knowledge and skills regarding the identiﬁcation of ﬂint sources and quarrying techniques and procedures had to be transmitted as well as the
concept and practice of ﬂint recycling. The focus on hunting
prime-aged fallow deer (highest fat content) necessitated precise identiﬁcation of speciﬁc deer to be targeted according to the
color of the fur and the brightness of the skin. It is not without
reason that the Saami of northern Norway, for example, use
more than 600 words for describing reindeer according to their
age, sex, color, coat, antlers, etc. (Clottes 2013). Tracking and
hunting selected fallow deer must have been a practice based
on speciﬁc knowledge and experience. Because we believe that
Acheulian hominins hunted game including elephants and
medium-sized animals, it goes without saying that parts of the
tracking and hunting procedures of the AYCC were already
practiced in the preceding Acheulian. However, because elephants contain large quantities of fat year round (Ben-Dor et al.
2011), fat-content-related choices had been marginal. When
elephants were no longer consumed in the AYCC and later, it
made a signiﬁcant difference which deer was being hunted in
order to supply not only meat but also fat, and thus new track-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

ing and hunting capabilities took center stage. After hunting,
speciﬁc butchering practices characterized the AYCC at Qesem,
and these had to be culturally transmitted as well (Blasco et al.
2013b). Last but not least, the habitual use of ﬁre in the AYCC
brought about a new set of knowledge and capabilities that
had to do with ﬁrewood collection, production and maintenance of ﬁre, ventilation of the cave in order to reduce pollution, and more, so the cost of making and keeping ﬁre must
also be taken into account (Henry 2017). Of course, roasting
and cooking meat (and maybe other foods) had to be culturally transmitted, too. It is our contention, therefore, that the
multitude of new AYCC adaptations necessitated elaborate
knowledge-transmission mechanisms quite possibly different
from those practiced by the Acheulians and supported by a
new social milieu.
We suggest that the disappearance of the elephants at ca.
400 ka triggered the hunting of an increased number of smaller
and faster animals to maintain protein supply and an adequate
fat content in the diet, and this was the evolutionary drive behind the emergence of the lighter, more agile, and cognitively
capable new humans in the Levant. Homo erectus in the Levant
must have been perfectly adapted to a diet in which the consumption of elephant meat played a signiﬁcant role. The need
to hunt larger numbers of selected medium-sized individuals
with high fat content might have encouraged new social relations based on new meat-sharing practices. The habitual use
of ﬁre for roasting meat and cooking might be connected to the
need to extract more calories from every food item (e.g., Carmody, Weintraub, and Wrangham 2011; Carmody and Wrangham 2009; Groopman, Carmody, and Wrangham 2015; Wrangham 2017), and the new lithic technologies might have been
aimed at a better manipulation of smaller game. The use of

Figure 4. Experimental demi-Quina ﬂint scraper replica used to
remove meat from bones throughout both longitudinal and transversal motions. An experiment conducted in the framework of a
use-wear study of the Qesem cave scrapers. Courtesy of Andrea
Zupanchich. A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

S325

Figure 5. Different moments during a butchery activity using replicas of small recycled ﬂint items. a, Deﬂeshing hide of a wild boar.
b, Disarticulating bone of a wild boar. c, Removing meat from a cow bone. d, e, Processing a sheep metapodium to obtain tendons.
Experiment conducted in the framework of a use-wear study of the Qesem cave recycled items. Courtesy of Flavia Venditti. A color
version of this ﬁgure is available online.

Quina scrapers and small cutting tools made of recycled items
might have been related to newly introduced processing methods (ﬁgs. 4, 5). Thus, the circumstances for the appearance of
the AYCC in the Levant and its characteristics provide a context for the earliest manifestations of the habitual use of ﬁre for
roasting and cooking meat. The AYCC provided a context open
for innovations and transformations, one of which was the
adoption of ﬁre. Such a major change in human behavior and
lifeways must have been negotiated and carefully tested before
being habitually adopted, and this is the case for many of the
other transformations that took shape during AYCC times. We
regard Acheulian human adaptation as highly successful and
as having enabled Lower Paleolithic communities in the Levant
to thrive for over 1 million years without using ﬁre commonly
and continuously and without roasting meat. Modifying this
long-lived mode of adaptation and introducing a set of innovations such as the one characterizing the Levantine AYCC
must have been for very good reasons. At around 400 ka in the
Levant, human groups developed a new (post-Acheulian) adaptation mode that enabled them to thrive for another 200 kyr,
until the next set of transformations took place, as reﬂected by
the appearance of Middle Paleolithic Mousterian lifeways. We
thus see the introduction, assimilation, and adoption of ﬁre as
a common human trait used for cooking meat as one of the
innovative aspects that characterized the new post-Acheulian

mode of adaptation in the Levant. This human trait must have
been highly successful, as it characterizes human behavior and
adaptation to this very day.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dennis Sandgathe and Francesco Berna,
the organizers of the symposium, for their warm hospitality
and kindness during the symposium and for the opportunity
to publish our work. We thank Leslie Aiello and Laurie Obbink for a perfectly organized and planned symposium carried
out in good spirit and with dedication. Special thanks go to the
workshop participants for many hours of discussions, laughter,
and even some disagreements that made the time enjoyable and
fruitful. The Qesem Cave excavation project is supported by the
Israel Science Foundation, the CARE Archaeological Foundation, the Leakey Foundation, the Wenner-Gren Foundation,
the Dan David Foundation, and the German Research Foundation. J. Rosell and R. Blasco develop their work within the
Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad/Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional projects CGL2015-65387-C3-1-P
and CGL2015-68604-P, the Generalitat de Catalunya-Agència
de Gestió d’Adjuts Universitaris I de Recerca projects 2014 SGR
900 and 2014/100573, and the SENECA Foundation project

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S326

Current Anthropology

19434/PI/14. We thank Andrea Zupanchich and Flavia Venditti for providing us illustrative material from their experimental work.

References Cited
Agam, Aviad, Ofer Marder, and Ran Barkai. 2015. Small ﬂake production and
lithic recycling at late Acheulian Revadim, Israel. Quaternary International
361:46–60.
Aldeias, Vera. 2017. Experimental approaches to archaeological ﬁre features
and their behavioral relevance. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S191–
S205.
Alhaique, Francesca. 1997. Do patterns of bone breakage differ between cooked
and uncooked bones? an experimental approach. Anthropozoologica 25/
26:49–56
Alperson-Aﬁl, Nira. 2017. Spatial analysis of ﬁre: archaeological approach to
recognizing early ﬁre. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S258–S266.
Alperson-Aﬁl, Nira, and Naama Goren-Inbar. 2010. Ancient ﬂames and controlled use of ﬁre, vol. 2 of The Acheulian site of Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov. New
York: Springer Science.
Assaf, Ella, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2016. Knowledge transmission and
apprentice ﬂint-knappers in the Acheulo-Yabrudian: a case study from Qesem
Cave, Israel. Quaternary International 398:70–85.
Assaf, Ella, Yoni Parush, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2015. Intra-site recycling variability at Qesem Cave, Israel: new evidence from an Amudian
and Yabrudian assemblages. Quaternary International 361:88–102.
Barkai, Ran, and Avi Gopher. 2011. Innovative human behavior between
Acheulian and Mousterian: a view from Qesem Cave, Israel. In The Lower and
Middle Paleolithic in the Middle East and neighboring regions. Jean-Marie Le
Tensorer, Reto Jagher, and Marcel Otte, eds. Pp. 121–130. ERAUL, 126. Liège:
Centre de recherches arché ologiques de l’Université de Liè ge.
———. 2013. Cultural and biological transformations in the Middle Pleistocene Levant: a view from Qesem Cave, Israel. In Dynamics of Learning in
Neanderthals and Modern Humans, vol. 1. Pp. 115–137. Tokyo: Springer.
———. 2016. On anachronism: the curious presence of spheroids and polyhedrons at Acheulo-Yabrudian Qesem Cave, Israel. Quaternary International 398:118–128.
Barkai, Ran, Avi Gopher, Stein-Erik Lauritzen, and Amos Frumkin. 2003.
Uranium series dates from Qesem Cave, Israel, and the end of the Lower
Paleolithic. Nature 423:977–979.
Barkai, Ran, Avi Gopher, Natalia Solodenko, and Cristina Lemorini. 2013. An
Amudian oddity: a giant biface from late Lower Palaeolithic Qesem cave.
Tel Aviv 40(2):176–186.
Barkai, Ran, Cristina Lemorini, and Avi Gopher. 2010. Palaeolithic cutlery
400 000–200 000 years ago: tiny meat-cutting tools from Qesem Cave,
Israel. Antiquity 84:325.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer. 1994. The Lower Paleolithic of the Near East. Journal of World
Prehistory 8(3):211–265.
———. 2006. The known and unknown about the Acheulian. In Acheulian
tool-making from quarry to discard. Naama Goren-Inbar and Gonen Sharon,
eds. Pp. 479–494. Approaches to Anthropological Archaeology. London:
Equinox.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer, and Steven L. Kuhn. 1999. The big deal about blades: laminar
technologies and human evolution. American Anthropologist 101(2):322–338.
Ben-Dor, Miki, Avi Gopher, Israel Hershkovitz, and Ran Barkai. 2011. Man the
fat hunter: the demise of Homo erectus and the emergence of a new hominin
lineage in the Middle Pleistocene (ca. 400 ka) Levant. PLoS ONE 6(12):
e28689, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028689.
Bennett, Joanne L. 1999. Thermal alteration of buried bone. Journal of Archaeological Science 26:1–8.
Berna, Francesco, Paul Goldberg, Liora K. Horwitz, James Brink, Sharon Holt,
Marion Bamford, and Michael Chazan. 2012. Microstratigraphic evidence
of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape
Province, South Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the USA 109(20):E1215–E1220.
Binford, Lewis. R. 1978. Nunamiut ethnoarchaeology. New York: Academic
Press.
———. 1983. In pursuit of the past: decoding the archaeological record. London: Thames & Hudson.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Felipe Cuartero, Josep Fernández-Peris, Avi Gopher,
and Ran Barkai. 2013a. Using bones to shape stones: MIS 9 bone retouchers

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

at both edges of the Mediterranean Sea. PLoS ONE 8(10):e76780, doi:10.1371
/journal.pone.0076780.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo, Segi Lozano, Ignasi
Pastó, David Riba, and Eudald Carbonell. 2013b. Learning by heart: cultural
patterns in the faunal processing sequence during the Middle Pleistocene.
PLoS ONE 8(2):e55863.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2014. Subsistence
economy and social life around the hearth: a zooarchaeological perspective
from Middle Pleistocene (300 ka) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 35:248–268.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Avi Gopher, Pablo Sañudo, and Ran Barkai. 2016a.
What happens around a ﬁre: faunal processing sequences and spatial distribution at Qesem Cave (300 ka), Israel. Quaternary International 398:190–209.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Krister T. Smith, Lutz Christian Maul, Pablo Sañudo,
Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2016b. Tortoises as a dietary supplement: a view
from the Middle Pleistocene site of Qesem Cave, Israel. Quaternary Science
Reviews 133:165–182.
Boaretto, Elisabetta, Ran Barkai, Avi Gopher, Francenco Berna, and Steve
Weiner. 2009. Specialized ﬂint procurement strategies for hand axes, scrapers
and blades in the late Lower Paleolithic: a 10Be study at Qesem Cave, Israel.
Journal of Human Evolution 24(1):1–12.
Bourguignon, Laurence. 2001. Apports de l’expérimentation et de l’analyse
techno-morpho-fonctionnelle à la reconnaissance des processus d’aménagement de la retouche Quina. In Préhistoire et approche expérimentale. Laurence
Bourguignon, llluminada Ortega, and Marie-Chantal Frère-Sautot, eds.
Pp. 35–66. Préhistoires no. 5. Montagnac: Monique Mergoil Editions.
Brain, Charles K. 1981. The hunters or the hunted? an introduction to African
cave taphonomy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Buikstra, Jane E., and Mark Swegle. 1989. Bone modiﬁcation due to burning:
experimental evidence. In Bone modiﬁcation. Robson Bonnichsen and Marcella H. Sorg, eds. Pp. 247–258. Orono: Center for the Study of the First
Americans, Institute for Quaternary Studies, University of Maine.
Cáceres, Isabel, Pilar Bravo, Montse Esteban, Isabel Exposito, and Palmira
Saladie. 2002. Fresh and heated bones breakage: an experimental approach.
In Current topics on taphonomy and fossilization. M. de Rienzi et al., eds.
Pp. 471–481. Valencia: Ayuntamiento de Valencia.
Carmody, Rachel N., Gil S. Weintraub, and Richard W. Wrangham. 2011. Energetic consequences of thermal and nonthermal food processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108(48):19199–19203.
Carmody, Rachel N., and Richard Wrangham. 2009. The energetic signiﬁcance of cooking. Journal of Human Evolution 57:379–391.
Cerdá, Manuel Polo, Elisa García-Prósper, and Alfred Sanchis Serra. 2005.
Estudio bioarqueológico de las cremaciones del monumento funerario romano del “solar de la morería” de Sagunto. ARSE: Boletín anual del Centro
Arqueológico Saguntino 39:229–268.
Chazan, Michael. 2017. Toward a long prehistory of ﬁre. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S351–S359.
Claud, Émilie, Marie Soressi, Jacques Jaubert, and Jean-Jacques Hublin. 2012.
Étude tracéologique de l’outillage moustérien de type Quina du bonebed de
Chez-Pinaud à Jonzac (Charente-Maritime): nouveaux éléments en faveur
d’un site de boucherie et de traitement des peaux. Gallia Préhistoire 54:3–32.
Clottes, Jean. 2013. Why did they draw in those caves? Time and Mind 6(1):7–14.
Copeland, Lorraine. 2000. Yabrudian and related industries: the state of research in 1996. In Toward modern humans: Yabrudian and Micoquian, 400–
50 k years ago. Avraham Ronen and Mina Weinstein-Evron, eds. Pp. 97–118.
BAR International Series 850. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Costamagno, Sandrine, Isabelle Théry-Parisot, Jean-Christophe Castel, and
Jean-Philippe Brugal. 2009. Combustible ou non? analyse multifactorielle et
modèles explicatifs sur des ossements brûlés paléolithiques. In Gestion des
combustibles au Paléolithique et au Mésolithique: nouveaux outils, nouvelles
interprétations. Isabelle Théry-Parisot, Sandrine Costamagno, and Auréade
Henry, eds. Pp. 65–84. BAR International Series 1914. Oxford: Archaeopress.
David, Bruno. 1990. How was this bone burnt? In Problem solving in taphonomy: archaeological and palaeontological studies from Europe, Africa and
Oceania. Su Solomon, Iain Davidson, and Di Watson, eds. Pp. 65–79. St. Lucia: Anthropology Museum, University of Queensland.
Dennell, Robin. 2009. The Paleolithic settlement of Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Endicott, Phillip, Simon Y. W. Ho, and Chris Stringer. 2010. Using genetic evidence to evaluate four palaeoanthropological hypotheses for the timing of Neanderthal and modern human origins. Journal of Human Evolution 59:87–95.
Falguères, Christophe, Maïlys Richard, Olivier Tombret, Qingfeng Shao, JeanJacques Bahain, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2016. New ESR/U-series

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Barkai et al.

Fire for a Reason

dates in Yabrudian and Amudian layers at Qesem cave, Israel. Quaternary
International 398:6–12.
Fernández Peris, Josep, Virginia Barciela, Ruth Blasco, Felipe Cuartero, Hannah Fluck, Pablo Sañudo, and Carlos Verdasco. 2012. The earliest evidence
of hearths in southern Europe: the case of Bolomor Cave (Valencia, Spain).
Quaternary International 247:267–277.
Fornai, Cinzia, Stefano Benazzi, Avi Gopher, Ran Barkai, Rachel Sarig, Fred
L. Bookstein, Israel Hershkovitz, and Gerhard W. Weber. 2016. The Qesem
Cave hominin material. 2. A morphometric analysis of dm2-QC2 deciduous lower second molar. Quaternary International 398:175–189.
Freidline, Sarah E., Philipp Gunz, Ivor Janković, Katerina Harvati, Max Planck
Hublin. 2012. A comprehensive morphometric analysis of the frontal and
zygomatic bone of the Zuttiyeh fossil from Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 62:225–241.
Frumkin, Amos, Panagiotis Karkanas, Miryam Bar-Matthews, Ran Barkai,
Avi Gopher, Ruth Shahack-Gross, and Anton Vaks. 2009. Gravitational
deformations and ﬁlling of aging caves: the example of Qesem Cave karst
system, Israel. Geomorphology 106:154–164.
Gabucio, Joana, Isabel Cáceres, Jordi Rosell, Palmira Saladié, and Josep Vallverdú. 2014. From small bone fragments to Neanderthal activity areas: the
case of Level O of the Abric Romaní (Capellades, Barcelona, Spain). Quaternary International 330:36–51.
Gao, Xing, Shuangquan Zhang, Yue Zhang, and Fuyou Chen. 2017. Evidence
of hominin use and maintenance of ﬁre at Zhoukoudian. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S267–S277.
Gifford-Gonzalez, Diana. 1989. Ethnographic analogues for interpreting modiﬁed bones: some cases from East Africa. In Bone modiﬁcation. Robson Bonnichsen and Marcella H. Sorg, eds. Pp. 61–71. Orono: Center for the Study of
the First Americans, Institute for Quaternary Studies, University of Maine.
Gilchrist, Roberta, and Harold Mytum. 1986. Experimental archaeology and
burnt animal bone from archaeological sites. Circaea 4:29–38.
Gopher, Avi, Avner Ayalon, Miryam Bar-Matthews, Ran Barkai, Amos Frumkin,
Panagiotis Karkanas, and Ruth Shahack-Gross. 2010. The chronology of the
late Lower Paleolithic in the Levant based on U-Th ages of speleothems from
Qesem cave, Israel. Quaternary Geochronology 5(6):644–656.
Gopher, Avi, Ran Barkai, Ron Shimelmitz, Hamudi Khalaily, Cristina Lemorini,
Israel Hershkovitz, and Mary Stiner. 2005. Qesem Cave: an Amudian site in
central Israel. Journal of the Israel Prehistoric Society 35:69–92.
Gopher, Avi, Yoni Parush, Ella Assaf, and Ran Barkai. 2016. Spatial aspects
as seen from a density analysis of lithics at Middle Pleistocene Qesem
Cave: preliminary results and observations. Quaternary International 398:
103–117.
Goren-Inbar, Naama, Nira Alperson-Aﬁl, Mordechai E. Kislev, Orit Simchoni,
Yoel Melamed, Adi Ben-Nun, and Ella Werker. 2004. Evidence of hominin
control of ﬁre at Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel. Science 304(5671):725–727.
Gowlett, J. A. J., J. S. Brink, Adam Caris, Sally Hoare, and S. M. Rucina. 2017.
Evidence of burning from bushﬁres in southern and east Africa and its
relevance to hominin evolution. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S206–
S216.
Gowlett, John A. 2010. Firing up the social brain. In Social brain and distributed
mind. Robin Dunbar, Clive Gamble, and John A. J. Gowlett, eds. Pp. 345–
370. London: British Academy.
Grayson, Donald K., Paul W. Parmalee, Lee R. Lyman, and Jim I. Mead. 1988.
Danger Cave, Last Supper Cave, and Hanging Rock Shelter: the faunas.
Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, vol. 66,
pt. 1. New York: American Museum of Natural History.
Groopman, Emily E., Rachel N. Carmody, and Richard W. Wrangham. 2015.
Cooking increases net energy gain from a lipid-rich food. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 156(1):11–18.
Hardy, Karen, Anita Radini, Stephen Buckley, Rachel Sarig, Les Copeland,
Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2016. Dental calculus reveals inhaled environmental contamination and ingestion of essential plant-based nutrients at Lower
Palaeolithic Qesem Cave Israel. Quaternary International 398:129–135.
Henry, Amanda G. 2017. Neanderthal cooking and the costs of ﬁre. Current
Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S329–S336.
Hershkovitz, Israel, Patricia Smith, Rachel Sarig, Rolf Quam, Laura Rodríguez,
Rebeca García, Juan-Luis Arsuaga, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2011. Middle
Pleistocene dental remains from Qesem Cave, Israel. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 144:575–592.
Hershkovitz, Israel, Gerhard W. Weber, Cinzia Fornai, Avi Gopher, Ran Barkai,
Viviane Slon, Rolf Quam, Gabet Yankel, and Rachel Sarig. 2016. New Middle
Pleistocene dental remains from Qesem cave (Israel). Quaternary International 398:148–158.

S327
Hlubik, Sarah, Francesco Berna, Craig Feibel, David Braun, and John W. K.
Harris. 2017. Researching the nature of ﬁre at 1.5 Mya on the site of FxJj20
AB, Koobi Fora, Kenya, using high-resolution spatial analysis and FTIR
spectrometry. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S243–S257.
Jelinek, Arthur J. 1982. The Middle Paleolithic in the Southern Levant, with
comments on the appearance of modern Homo sapiens. In The transition
from Lower to Middle Paleolithic and the origin of modern man. Avraham
Ronen, ed. Pp. 57–101. BAR International Series 151. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
———. 1990. The Amudian in the context of the Mugharan tradition at the
Tabun Cave (Mount Carmel), Israel. In The emergence of modern humans.
Paul Mellars, ed. Pp. 81–90. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Johnson, Cara Roure, and Sally McBrearty. 2010. 500,000 year old blades from
the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya. Journal of Human Evolution 58:193–200.
Johnson, Eileen. 1989. Human modiﬁed bones from early southern plains sites.
In Bone modiﬁcation. Robson Bonnichsen and Marcella H. Sorg, eds. Pp. 431–
471. Orono: Center for the Study of the First Americans, Institute for Quaternary Studies, University of Maine.
Karkanas, Panagiotis, Ruth Shahack-Gross, Avner Ayalon, Miryam BarMatthews, Ran Barkai, Amos Frumkin, Avi Gopher, and Mary C. Stiner.
2007. Evidence for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the Lower Paleolithic:
site-formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 53:197–212.
Keith, Arthur. 1927. A report on the Galilee skull. In Researches in prehistoric
Galilee, 1925–1926. Francis Turville-Pétre, ed. Pp. 593–623. London: Council
of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem.
Le Cabec, Adeline, Philipp Gunz, Kornelius Kupczik, José Braga, and JeanJacques Hublin. 2013. Anterior tooth root morphology and size in Neanderthals: taxonomic and functional implications. Journal of Human Evolution
64:169–193.
Lemorini, Cristina, Laurance Bourguignon, Andrea Zupancich, Avi Gopher,
and Ran Barkai. 2016. A scraper’s life history: morpho-techno-functional
and use-wear analysis of Quina and demi-Quina scrapers from Qesem Cave,
Israel. Quaternary International 398:86–93.
Lemorini, Cristina, Avi Gopher, Ron Shimelmitz, Mary Stiner, and Ran Barkai.
2006. Use-wear analysis of an Amudian laminar assemblage from AcheuleoYabrudian Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 33:921–934.
Lemorini, Cristina, Flavia Venditti, Ella Assaf, Yoni Parush, Ran Barkai, and Avi
Gopher. 2015. The function of recycled lithic items at late Lower Paleolithic
Qesem Cave, Israel: an overview of the use-wear data. Quaternary International 361:103–112.
Liu, Wu, Lynne A. Schepartz, Song Xing, Sari Miller-Antonio, Xiujie Wu, Erik
Trinkaus, and María Martinón-Torres. 2013. Late Middle Pleistocene hominin teeth from Panxian Dadong, South China. Journal of Human Evolution
64:337–355.
Lyman, L. R. 1994. Vertebrate taphonomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayne, Pamela M. 1997. Fire modiﬁcation of bone: a review of the literature.
In Forensic taphonomy: the postmortem fate of human remains. William D.
Haglund and Marcella H. Sorg, eds. Pp. 275–293. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.
Melamed, Yoel, Mordechai E. Kislev, Eli Geffen, Simcha Lev-Yadun, and
Naama Goren-Inbar. 2016. The plant component of an Acheulian diet at
Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 113(51):14674–14679.
Mendez, Fernando L., Thomas Krahn, Bonnie Schrack, Astrid-Maria Krahn,
Krishna R. Veeramah, August E. Woerner, Forka L. M. Fomine, et al. 2013.
An African American paternal lineage adds an extremely ancient root to
the human Y chromosome phylogenetic tree. American Journal of Human
Genetics 92(3):454–459.
Mentzer, Suzan. 2009. Bone as a fuel source: the affects of initial fragment size
distribution. In Gestion des combustibles au Paléolithique et au Mésolithique:
nouveaux outils, nouvelles interprétations. I. Théry-Parisot, S. Costamagno,
and A. Henry, eds. Pp. 53–64. BAR International Series 1914. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Mercier, Norbert, Hélène Valladas, Christophe Falguères, Qingfeng Shao, Avi
Gopher, Ran Barkai, Jean-Jacques Bahain, Laurence Vialettes, Jean-Louis
Joron, and Jean-Louis Reyss. 2013. New datings of Amudian layers at Qesem
cave (Israel): results of TL applied to burnt ﬂints and ESR/U-series to teeth.
Journal of Archaeological Science 40:3011–3020.
Morin, Eugine. 2010. Taphonomic implications of the use of bone as fuel.
Palethnologie 2:209–217.
Nicholson, Rebecca A. 1993. A morphological investigation of burnt animal
bone and an evaluation of its utility in archaeology. Journal of Archaeological
Science 20:411–428.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S328

Current Anthropology

Oliver, James S. 1993. Carcass processing by the Hadza: bone breakage from
butchery to consumption. In From bones to behavior: ethnoarchaelogical
and experimental contributions to the interpretation of faunal remains.
J. Hudson, ed. Pp. 200–227. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional Paper 21. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University, Center for Archaeological Investigations.
Parush, Yoni, Ella Assaf, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2015. Looking for sharp
edges: modes of ﬂint recycling at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel.
Quaternary International 361:61–87.
Parush, Yoni, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2016. Amudian versus Yabrudian
under the rock shelf: a study of two lithic assemblages from Qesem Cave,
Israel. Quaternary International 398:13–36.
Rink, William J., Norbert Mercier, Dušan Mihalović, Mike W. Morley, Jeroen
W. Thompson, and Mirjana Roksandic. 2013. New radiometric ages from
the BH-1 hominin from Balanica (Serbia): implications for understanding
the role of the Balkans in Middle Pleistocene human evolution. PLoS ONE
8(2):e54608, doi:10.1371.
Roebroeks, Wil, and Paola Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual
use of ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 108(13):5209–5214.
Rolland, Nicolas, 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic ﬁre a
punctuated event? a review of the Middle Pleistocene record in Eurasia.
Asian Perspectives 43(2):248–280.
Rosell, Jordi, Ruth Blasco, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2015. Recycling bones
in the Middle Pleistocene: some reﬂections from Gran Dolina TD10–1
(Spain), Bolomor Cave (Spain) and Qesem Cave (Israel). Quaternary International 361:297–312.
Rosell, Jordi, Isabel Cáceres, Ruth Blasco, Maria Lluc Bennàsar, Pilar Bravo,
Gerard Campeny, Montse Esteban-Nadal, et al. 2012. A zooarchaeological
contribution to establish occupational patterns at Level J of Abric Romaní
(Barcelona, Spain). Quaternary International 247:69–84.
Rust, Alfred. 1950. Die Hohlenfunde von Jabrud (Syrien). Neumünster.
Sánchez-Marco, Antonio, Ruth Blasco, Jordi Rosell, Avi Gopher, and Ran
Barkai. 2016. Birds as indicators of high biodiversity zones around the Middle
Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel. Quaternary International 421:23–31.
Sarig, Rachel, Avi Gopher, Ran Barkai, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, Gerhard W.
Weber, Cinzia Fornai, Tatiana Sella-Tunis, and Israel Hershkovitz. 2016.
How did the Qesem Cave people use their teeth? analysis of dental wear
patterns. Quaternary International 398:136–147.
Shahack-Gross, Ruth, Ofer Bar-Yosef, and Steve Weiner. 1997. Black-coloured
bones in Hayonim Cave, Israel: differentiating between burning and oxide
staining. Journal of Archaeological Science 24(5):439–446.
Shahack-Gross, Ruth, Francesco Berna, Panagiotis Karkanas, Cristina Lemorini,
Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2014. Evidence for the repeated use of a central
hearth at Middle Pleistocene (300 ky ago) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of
Archaeological Science 44:12–21.
Shimelmitz, R. 2015. The recycling of ﬂint throughout the Lower and Middle
Paleolithic sequence of Tabun Cave, Israel. Quaternary International 361:34–46.
Shimelmitz, Ron, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2016. Regional variability in
late Lower Paleolithic Amudian blade technology: analyzing new data from
Qesem, Tabun and Yabrud I. Quaternary International 398:37–60.
Shimelmitz, Ron, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2011. Systematic blade production at late Lower Paleolithic (400–200 kyr) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal
of Human Evolution 61:458–479.
Shimelmitz, Ron, Steven L. Kuhn, Arthur J. Jelinek, Avraham Ronen, Amy E.
Clark, and Mina Weinstein-Evron. 2014. “Fire at will”: the emergence of
habitual ﬁre use 350,000 years ago. Journal of Human Evolution 77:196–203.
Shipman, Pat, Giraud Foster, and Margaret Schoeninger. 1984. Burnt bones
and teeth: an experimental study of color, morphology, crystal structure
and shrinkage. Journal of Archaeological Science 11(4):307–325.
Solari, Ana, Daniel E. Olivera, Inés Gordillo, Pedro Bosch, Geolar Fetter, Victor
Hugo Lara, and Omar Novelo. 2015. Cooked bones? method and practice
for identifying bones treated at low temperature. International Journal of
Osteoarchaeology 25:426–440.
Spennemann, Dirk H. R., and Sarah M. Colley. 1989. Fire in a pit: the effects
of burning on faunal remains. Archaeozoologia 3(1/2):51–64.
Speth, John D. 2006. Housekeeping, Neandertal-style: hearth placement and
midden formation in Kebara cave (Israel). In Transitions before the tran-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

sition: evolution and stability in the Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone
Age. E. Hovers and S. L. Kuhn, eds. Pp. 171–188. Interdisciplinary Contributions to Archaeology. New York: Springer.
———. 2012. Middle Palaeolithic subsistence in the Near East: zooarchaeological perspectives past, present and future. Before Farming 2(1):1–45.
Speth, John D., L. Meignen, O. Bar-Yosef, and P. Goldberg. 2012. Spatial
organization of Middle Paleolithic occupation X in Kebara Cave (Israel):
concentrations of animal bones. Quaternary International 247:85–102
Stiner, Mary C., Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2009. Cooperative hunting and
meat sharing 400–200 kya at Qesem Cave, Israel. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 106(32):13207–13212.
———. 2011. Hearth-side socioeconomics, hunting and paleoecology during
the late Lower Paleolithic at Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 60:213–233.
Stiner, Mary C., S. L. Kuhn, and T. A. Surovell. 2001. Bone preservation in
Hayonim Cave (Israel): a macroscopic and mineralogical study. Journal of
Archaeological Science 28:643–659
Stiner, Mary C., Steven L. Kuhn, Stephen Weiner, and Ofer Bar-Yosef. 1995.
Differential burning, recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological
bone. Journal of Archaeological Science 22(2):223–237.
Théry-Parisot, Isabelle. 2002. Fuel management (bone and wood) during the
Lower Aurignacian in the Pataud Rock Shelter (Lower Palaeolithic, Les Eyzies
de Tayac, Dordogne, France): contribution of experimentation. Journal of
Archaeological Science 29:1415–1421.
Valladas, Hélène, Norbert Mercier, Israel Hershkovitz, Yossi Zaidner, Alexander
Tsatskin, Reuven Yeshurun, Laurence Vialettes, Jean-Louis Joron, Jean-Louis
Reyss, and Mina Weinstein-Evron. 2013. Dating the Lower to Middle Paleolithic transition in the Levant: a view from Misliya Cave, Mount Carmel,
Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 65(5):585–593.
Verri, Giovanni, Ran Barkai, Cristian Bordeanu, Avi Gopher, Michael Hass,
Aaron Kaufman, Peter W. Kubik, et al. 2004. Flint mining in prehistory record
by in situ produced cosmogenic 10Be. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA 101(21):7880–7884.
Verri, Giovanni, Ran Barkai, Avi Gopher, Michael Hass, Peter W. Kubik,
Michael Paul, Avraham Ronen, Steve Weiner, and Elisabetta Boaretto. 2005.
Flint procurement strategies in the late Lower Palaeolithic record by in situ
produced cosmogenic 10Be in Tabun and Qesem Caves (Israel). Journal of
Archaeological Science 32:207–213.
Weber, Gerhard W., Cinzia Fornai, Avi Gopher, Ran Barkai, Rachel Sarig, and
Israel Hershkovitz. 2016. The Qesem Cave hominin material. 1. A morphometric analysis of the mandibular premolars and molar. Quaternary International 398:159–174.
Wiessner, Polly W. 2014. Embers of society: ﬁrelight talk among the Ju/’hoansi
bushmen. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 111
(39):14027–14035.
Wilkins, Jane, and Michael Chazan. 2012. Blade production ~500 thousand
years ago at Kathu Pan 1, South Africa: support for a multiple origins hypothesis for early Middle Pleistocene blade technology. Journal of Archaeological Science 39(6):1883–1990.
Wilson, Lucy, Aviad Agam, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2016. Preliminary
evaluation of raw material choices in the Amudian versus the Yabrudian at
Qesem Cave. Quaternary International 398:61–69.
Wrangham, Richard. 2017. Control of ﬁre in the Paleolithic: evaluating the
cooking hypothesis. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S303–S313.
Yravedra, José, and Paloma Uzquiano. 2013. Burnt bone assemblages from El
Esquilleu cave (Cantabria, northern Spain): deliberate use for fuel or systematic disposal of organic waste? Quaternary Science Reviews 68:175–190.
Zeitoun, Valery. 2001. The taxonomical position of the skull of Zuttiyeh.
Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, série IIa: Sciences de la Terre
et des Planètes 332:521–525.
Zupancich, Andrea, Cristina Lemorini, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2016a.
On scraper handling: preliminary results from a use-wear and experimental
approaches on the Lower Palaeolithic site of Qesem Cave, Israel. Quaternary International 398:94–102.
Zupancich, Andrea, Stela Nunziante-Cesaro, Ruth Blasco, Jordi Rosell, Emanuela Cristiani, Flavia Venditti, Cristina Lemorini, Ran Barkai, and Avi
Gopher. 2016b. Early evidence of stone tool use in bone working activities
at Qesem Cave, Israel. Scientiﬁc Reports 6:37686.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:17 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

