S360

Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

Identifying and Describing Pattern and Process
in the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire
by Dennis M. Sandgathe
Although research relating to Paleolithic ﬁre use has a long history, it has seen a particular resurgence in the last
decade. This has been fueled in part by improved analytical techniques, improved standards of data collection and
reporting, and the discovery of new sites with important ﬁre residues in Africa, the Middle East, and Europe. A major
component of this new research has been to identify when “controlled use” and “habitual use” of ﬁre developed
among Pleistocene hominins. However, an important starting point of this discussion is deﬁning what is meant by
“controlled use” and “habitual use,” as these terms have come to be used in undeﬁned, inconsistent ways in the
literature. We also need to lay out clearly how these behaviors might be recognized in the archaeological record and
come to some understanding of what the potential implications of the development of these technologies and their
geographic and climatic contexts are for the course of hominin evolution.
Research into the early use of ﬁre in prehistory has tended to
focus on two major questions: when did hominins ﬁrst begin
using ﬁre, and when did ﬁre use become an integral component of hominin adaptations. Both of these questions tended to
be dealt with in a rather simplistic manner in previous decades.
This simplicity is not surprising for the early years of interest
in prehistoric ﬁre use, as researchers were only beginning to
develop some understanding of the nature of the available data
and the potential implications for ﬁre use in early hominin
adaptations. In recent years, we are starting to come to terms
with how potentially long and complex the process of hominin
development of pyrotechnology might have been. However,
the current discussion often seems to continue to ignore the
probable complexity of this development and how problematic
the available evidence continues to be (with signiﬁcant exceptions, e.g., Chazan 2017; Parker et al. 2016). This issue is
reﬂected in the continued suggestion in some of the literature
that there will be a single point in prehistory at which ﬁre use
was adopted by hominins and that from that point on it was
used by all hominins everywhere (e.g., Barkai et al. 2017;
Daniau, d’Errico, and Sanchez Goni 2011:1). It is becoming
readily apparent that this scenario is a signiﬁcant oversimpliﬁcation of how the process probably occurred. While researchers do continue to look for the very earliest evidence for “con-

trolled” use of ﬁre (e.g., Berna et al. 2012), and this is surely an
important question, a major hurdle in attempts to reach some
understanding of the development of pyrotechnology continues
to be a limited appreciation of the difﬁculty in distinguishing
residues of hominin use of ﬁre from naturally occurring ﬁre,
especially in Lower Pleistocene contexts (Barbetti 1986; see also
the prelude in Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer 2017). This is
somewhat less of an issue with research in Middle Pleistocene
contexts, where we do have some clear examples of hominin use
of ﬁre. In these cases, the goal appears to be more one of identifying examples of long-term, successive use of ﬁre interpreted
to be evidence of “habitual” ﬁre use. So far, claims of habitual ﬁre
use are mainly only from single sites as opposed to examples of
regional patterns of use (although see Roebroeks and Villa 2011).
After the very earliest use, regular or successive use could be a
reasonable expectation as the next major step in the development
of hominin use of ﬁre. However, what we mean by the terms
“controlled” and “habitual” and what their implications for hominin evolution and adaptation are need to be discussed and
better deﬁned (e.g., Alperson-Aﬁl 2017; Barkai et al. 2017). This
requires the use of more explicit terminology and the development of a theoretical framework that better reﬂects the relationship between the evidence recovered from the archaeological
record and our interpretations of it.

Dennis M. Sandgathe is Lecturer in the Department of Archaeology
at Simon Fraser University (8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British
Columbia V5A 1S6, Canada [dms@sfu.ca]) and at the Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania
(3260 South Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA). This
paper was submitted 25 VII 16, accepted 20 I 17, and electronically
published 17 V 17.

Issues in Current Research on the Development
of Pyrotechnology
Much has already been written on the issue of identifying the
earliest evidence of hominin use of ﬁre (e.g., Barbetti 1986;
Bellomo 1993; Goudsblom 1986; Gowlett et al. 1981; Gowlett
and Wrangham 2013; James 1989; Pickering et al. 2008; Roe-

q 2017 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2017/58S16-0018$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/691459

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sandgathe

Describing the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire

broeks and Villa 2011), but that is not the focus of this paper.
However, this continues to be a point of major debate, and the
reasons for this underlie, to a large extent, debates about the
development of hominin ﬁre use in general (see Sandgathe and
Berna 2017 for some discussion of this). What is of concern in
this paper is an attempt to achieve some understanding of what
researchers interested in the development of ﬁre use really mean
when they use speciﬁc terms to describe the hominin behavior
they see reﬂected in the archaeological record and how this
behavior ﬁts into broader ideas about the nature of the whole
process of development of ﬁre use. How are researchers envisioning the long-term process of the development of pyrotechnology, and what terms do they use to describe this? The term
most commonly used in the literature in reference to the prehistoric development of ﬁre use is “controlled use.” In the recent
literature another term has begun to become common: “habitual use.” Both terms might be appropriate and useful in certain circumstances, but neither has been well deﬁned so that
other researchers understand what is meant or intended by
their use. This makes it difﬁcult for individuals to follow how
other researchers are imagining the process of the development
of ﬁre use went, which makes it difﬁcult to take into consideration and build on others’ work.

“Control of Fire”/“Controlled Use of Fire”?
Much of the research on early ﬁre use has been concerned
with identifying the appearance of the “controlled use of ﬁre.”
While the use of the term “control” (in speciﬁc reference to hominin ﬁre use in the literature) probably appears quite early in
Paleolithic archaeology, it becomes almost ubiquitous by the
late 1970s and early 1980s (e.g., Bellomo 1994; Clark and Harris 1985; Goudsblom 1986; Gowlett et al. 1981; James [and comments] 1989; Rowlett 2000; it would not be difﬁcult to ﬁnd 30
or 40 more references) and is the current term of choice in
almost all the literature when referring to the early appearance
of ﬁre.
There are two important issues with the use of the term
“control.” The ﬁrst issue is that for many researchers there is
no discussion of, or indication of, an expectation of potential
stages in the development of ﬁre use between when hominins
were not using ﬁre at all and their establishing control of it.
This might be because for these researchers “control” means
the most basic handling of ﬁre, and so any potential evidence
of early ﬁre use is considered evidence for control of it (e.g.,
Alperson-Aﬁl 2012, 2017; Alperson-Aﬁl, Richter, and GorenInbar 2007; Bellomo 1993, 1994; Clark and Harris 1985; GorenInbar et al. 2004). (Some researchers use both “use” and “control”
and seem explicitly to equate the terms, e.g., Bellomo [1993].)
There are some important exceptions. A few researchers have
made a distinction between “using” ﬁre and “controlling” ﬁre
(Goren-Inbar et al. 2004; James 1989) or “opportunistic” (Shimelmitz et al. 2014) versus “controlled” (James 1989) use or
“fortuitous use” versus control of ﬁre (see also Bentsen 2014

S361

and Goudsblom 1986 for discussions of the idea of stages of
development of ﬁre use). One exception is Pruetz and LaDuke
(2010:4), who propose three cognitive and, presumably, chronologically successive stages that hominids would have to go
through over the course of the development of ﬁre use:
1. Conceptualization of ﬁre: an understanding of the behavior of ﬁre, which would allow activity in close proximity to it;
2. The ability to control a ﬁre: the knowledge and ability to
contain, feed, and extinguish ﬁre;
3. The ability to start a ﬁre: the knowledge and technology
necessary to create ﬁre at will.
A second exception is Smith (Monica L. Smith, personal communication, 2015), who proposed four stages, with very similar
components, “that reﬂect increasing deliberation and control”:
(1) habituation, (2) use, (3) curation, and (4) manufacture (see
also Chazan 2017 for a similar discussion but slightly different
criteria).
The second issue with the use of the term “control” is that
while it is almost never explicitly deﬁned or explained, for
many researchers the apparent implication seems to be that
control of ﬁre meant hominins had the ability to create ﬁre at
will (Alperson-Aﬁl 2008, 2012; Attwell, Kovarovic, and Kendal
2015; Brown 2009).
These distinctions are important considering the problems
we often have in even identifying genuine anthropogenic ﬁre
residues in early sites (e.g., Shöningen: Stahlschmidt et al. 2015;
and Zhoukoudien: Goldberg et al. 2001). One of the frequent
problems in developing an understanding of the development of
pyrotechnology is achieving a reasonable degree of conﬁdence
that genuine ﬁre residues identiﬁed at a site are actually anthropogenic and not the result of natural ﬁres (this degree of
conﬁdence is, unfortunately, still a subjective thing and will vary
between sites and researchers). For cave sites it has long been
recognized that this is not nearly as big a problem (Berna et al.
2012; Roebroeks and Villa 2011), although there are obviously
situations in which natural ﬁre residues can occur in cave deposits (spontaneous combustion of organic deposits or sediments washing into a cave). For open-air sites, however, this
must be seen as an important issue (see the prelude in Goldberg,
Miller, and Mentzer 2017). In some regions and during some
climatic periods, natural ﬁres of various types (grass ﬁres, brush
ﬁres, forest ﬁres) are essentially ubiquitous, especially in the
context of geological or Paleolithic timescales. This is particularly the case for consistently warmer and drier climatic regions
such as Africa and southwest Asia and the huge span of time
represented by the Lower Pleistocene. The probability seems
vanishingly small that the location of any open-air Early Stone
Age–Lower Paleolithic site would not have natural ﬁres pass
over it at least once (and probably many times) in the period of
time since its deposition. If the site is not too deeply buried,
artifacts and bones can be altered by the heat of a passing natural
ﬁre, and charcoal and ash from natural ﬁres can be introduced

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S362

Current Anthropology

into the site sequence (see Aldeias 2017 and Aldeias et al. 2016
for a discussion of heat transfer into sediment substrates, and
see Gowlett et al. 2017 for a study of the effects of natural ﬁres
on exposed objects).
Claims for early hominin use of ﬁre are often based on arguments that the ﬁre residues in question either bear no reasonable similarity to residues generally associated with natural
ﬁres (e.g., Bellomo 1993, 1994; Berna et al. 2012; Gowlett et al.
2005; Isaac 1982; James 1989; and Pickering et al. 2008) or
the site deposits could not reasonably have been postdepositionally altered by natural ﬁres (e.g., Alperson-Aﬁl, Richter,
and Goren-Inbar 2007; Goren-Inbar et al. 2004; Pickering et al.
2008). This might be a reasonable approach in some cases, but
currently we still do not know enough about natural ﬁres and
their potential range of resulting residues—either types of
residues, patterns of their dispersion, or how the heat of such
ﬁres may alter sediments and objects they come into contact
with—to realistically make such arguments in many (perhaps
most?) cases. Some experimental work has been done on this,
but most of this has been very limited and has not gone far
enough in bracketing the potential range of natural ﬁre types,
their characteristics, their residues, and their effects on substrates (e.g., Aldeias 2017; Aldeias et al. 2012; Bellomo 1993;
Canti and Linford 2000; Gowlett et al. 2017; March 1992). We
do not know, for example, how frequently and in what circumstances a tree or bush burning down into its root system
will result in patches of blackened or rubiﬁed sediments that
look similar to the remains of an actual hearth. Or, as a further
example, we do not have a good understanding at all of the
relationship between variation in natural ﬁre frequencies and
resulting charcoal distributions and concentrations in regional
sediment records (e.g., Peters and Higuera 2007). With respect
to the issue of distinguishing residues of anthropogenic ﬁre
from natural ﬁre, our interpretations have consistently been
getting ahead of our understanding of the available data.
Therefore, in many cases we are still debating the origin
of ﬁre residues at archaeological sites, and so it is obviously
problematic to start assuming that hominins created the ﬁre.
Even in cases where it seems very clear that the ﬁres were the
result of hominin behavior, there still remains the possibility that they acquired the ﬁre from natural sources and did
not create it themselves. This possibility seems to be consistently overlooked, underappreciated, or simply dismissed out
of hand.
It seems logical to attempt to make some distinction between
the different potential interpretations of the archaeological record. Depending on the nature of the available evidence and our
conﬁdence in it, we may arrive at one of the following general
interpretations:
1. There are genuine ﬁre residues associated with an archaeological site, but (at least currently) we have no way to
determine conﬁdently whether they are associated with
hominin use of ﬁre or are simply the result of natural ﬁre
and have no actual association with hominin behavior.

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

2. Fire residues identiﬁed at a site are demonstrably the result of
hominins using ﬁre, but we have no way to know how they
acquired it (James’s [1989] and Goren-Inbar et al.’s [2004]
“using ﬁre” and Smith’s [personal communication, 2015]
“use” of ﬁre).
3. Hominins were using ﬁre that they collected from a natural source (Shimelmitz et al.’s [2014] “opportunistic use”
or James’s [1989] “fortuitous use”).
4. Hominins were using ﬁre that they created with ﬁremaking technology.
These reﬂect increasing levels of understanding of hominin
behavior that, to achieve, would necessarily require increasingly better quality and types of data and increased conﬁdence in our understanding of those data. I would suggest
that for the majority of (perhaps all) claims of hominin use of
ﬁre associated with Middle Paleolithic–Middle Stone Age contexts and earlier, we are, at best, at the second level: ﬁre residues
identiﬁed at a site are demonstrably the result of hominins using
ﬁre, but we have no way to know how they acquired it. However,
getting at some of these interpretations is going to be particularly difﬁcult, for example, distinguishing hominin use of ﬁre
that they created from hominin use of ﬁre collected from a
natural source.

“Habitual” Use of Fire at Individual Sites
Much of the recent work on early ﬁre has been focussed more
on identifying Middle Pleistocene examples of repeated and
continuous ﬁre use at individual sites (e.g., Aldeias et al. 2012;
Alperson-Aﬁl 2008; Blasco et al. 2015; Karkanas et al. 2007;
Shimelmitz et al. 2014). To date, the Lower Pleistocene record
of hominin ﬁre use is restricted entirely to Africa and southwest
Asia and is best characterized in these regions as sketchy, to
say the least. In light of this, the ﬁrst appearances of examples
of repeated ﬁre use within a site rightly take on major significance in the history of development of pyrotechnology.
The oldest of these is the open-air site of Gesher Benot
Ya‘akov (Israel), dated to approximately 800 kya, which appears to have a few superimposed layers with ﬁre residues
(Alperson-Aﬁl 2017). However, the earliest unquestionable examples of hominin use of ﬁre and long-term, continuous ﬁre
use occur in cave sites in Israel dating from the latter half of
the Middle Pleistocene. Between 350 and 200 kya we have the
notable examples of Hayonim Cave, Qesem Cave, and Tabun
Cave, where the sequences have recorded what appear to reﬂect regular and successive use of ﬁre over much of this period. This record includes impressive examples of sequences
of stacked hearths (on the order of dozens at Hayonim Cave;
e.g., Bar Yosef et al. 2005; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Shiegl
et al. 1996) and notably high percentages of burned lithics in
successive layers spanning tens of thousands of years in other
cases (e.g., Tabun Cave; Shimelmitz et al. 2014). So far these
sites appear to be the earliest evidence for ﬁre use potentially

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sandgathe

Describing the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire

being a “regularly” repeated behavior and perhaps an integral
component of a local population’s adaptation.
This long-term successive use of ﬁre at individual sites has
been described as the ﬁrst evidence for “habitual” use (Bentsen
2014; Karkanas et al. 2007; Roebroeks and Villa 2011; ShahackGross et al. 2014; Shimelmitz et al. 2014). The term “habitual”
has come into regular use in recent years. Shahack-Gross et al.
(2014) deﬁne “habitual” (as they use it) as “systematically repeated use of ﬁre in speciﬁc sites and/or regions” (12). Shimelmitz et al. (2014), in their observation of the ﬁre record at
Tabun, make a distinction between “occasional and opportunistic use of ﬁre” and “habitual and planned” and suggest that
“habitual” means that ﬁre was “a consistent element in behavioral adaptations” (196). While it may very well be the case that
different researchers intend different meanings when they use
the term, “habitual use” typically means (or at least implies)
“regular,” “persistent,” “continuous,” or “perpetual.” In applying it to prehistoric ﬁre use, would this mean daily use and
at every occupation of a site by the hominins in question? It
certainly seems to be strongly implied (though not explicitly
stated) that at this level of use, hominins were making ﬁre
themselves and not relying on natural sources.
However, without some understanding of the actual frequency of ﬁre use at these sites and whether these groups are
actually creating ﬁre at will, this becomes problematic. While
at a coarse level the ﬁre sequences may be described as “regular,” “successive,” or even “continuous,” there may still be
decades, centuries, or in some cases even millennia between ﬁreuse events. The types of data necessary to achieve the necessary
resolution between ﬁre events recorded in a site sequence can
only potentially come from micromorphology, and even with
this there are often going to be cases that are not deﬁnitive (see,
e.g., Aldeais et al. 2012; Goldberg et al. 2012).
“Habitual” Use of Fire across a Region
Roebroeks and Villa (2011) take a broader geographical
(continental) approach and discuss the evidence for the appearance of habitual ﬁre use in Europe. They make the case that
increased frequencies of ﬁre residues in Europe after 400 kya
reﬂect the appearance of habitual use. The current evidence
seems to show that any real use of ﬁre only began after 400 kya
(potential ﬁre use at Cueva Negra is the single example that
predates the late Middle Pleistocene; Walker et al. 2016).
However, in higher latitudes—Europe in particular (although
data from East and South Asia are very limited)—the evidence
suggests that while some hominins in some places and at some
times were deﬁnitely using ﬁre, this use clearly remained intermittent and spotty even quite late in the Paleolithic. There
is compelling evidence that as recently as the latter half of the
Late Pleistocene, at least some hominin populations were not
always using ﬁre during signiﬁcant occupations of cave sites
(e.g., Aldeias et al. 2012; Dibble et al. 2017; Goldberg et al. 2012;
Sandgathe et al. 2011a, 2011b). However, even in this context,
the term “habitual” has come to be used to describe European

S363

hominin use of ﬁre starting by 400 kya (Roebroeks and Villa
2011). It seems probable that in this case the term “habitual”
has a different intended meaning.
But even if we were able to demonstrate that ﬁre was being used at every visit to a particular site over very long periods or being used frequently across a region, this still does
not necessarily imply that these hominins were creating the
ﬁre themselves. Examples of increased frequency or more regular use of ﬁre at a site or in a region may just be reﬂecting
regular access to natural ﬁre sources in latitudes and climatic
periods where the frequencies of natural ﬁre are elevated—it
may still be opportunistic use of natural ﬁre (Sandgathe et al.
2011b) but in situations where the opportunity to access natural ﬁre is frequent or even constant. Ultimately, our understanding of the development of pyrotechnology will need to
rely even more heavily on the analysis of site-level data (sediments and residues; see Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer 2017),
but we also need to seriously consider any apparent geographic
and temporal patterning of ﬁre residues in the archaeological
record.
Recognizing What the Patterns Mean
When it comes to interpreting the available data on Paleolithic
ﬁre use, of course we recognize that there are some general
considerations. These include some basic taphonomic realities (see Aldeias 2017; Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer 2017;
Gowlett and Wrangham 2013 for more on this):
• A general loss of archaeological sites over time: the older the
time period, the lower the percentage of sites that have been
preserved because of simple geologic and erosional attrition.
• A loss of ephemeral ﬁre residues over time: the greater the
passage of time, the fewer the ﬁre residues that tend to survive
even in sites that have been preserved.
• Fire residues are likely to survive better in protected (cave)
sites than in open-air sites. This is especially the case with
ephemeral residues such as ash and charcoal and less so with
residues such as burned bone or burned lithics.
The result is that there will be a general loss of evidence for
ﬁre in successively older sites. Because of this we must rely
more heavily on types of evidence that are not typically affected by such taphonomic processes, for example, frequencies of burned ﬂints, magnetic susceptibility, Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy, and micromorphological analysis (see
Dibble et al. 2017; Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer 2017).
There are also some important general considerations in
not only the types of data but how the data should be compiled.
For example, Gowlett and Wrangham (2013) correctly argue
that the simple use of presence-absence data severely limits
our potential understanding of early ﬁre use. Simple presenceabsence comparison of ﬁre residues between different sites will
not be particularly informative. For example, a single site with
10 stratigraphic layers, one of which has ﬁre residues, will count

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S364

Current Anthropology

in the literature as a single example of positive evidence of ﬁre
use, while a site with 10 layers, none of which has ﬁre residues,
counts as a single example of lack of evidence of ﬁre use. Such
a scenario, with a total of 20 distinct strata potentially spanning many millennia only one of which has evidence for ﬁre
use, would be presented as 50% of the sites having evidence for
ﬁre. This was the approach that Roebroeks and Villa (2011)
took. This is not intended as a criticism of their paper, as it was
the ﬁrst to even attempt to carry out broader regional analysis
of ﬁre-use patterns based on a large database, and they should
be credited for this, but we are at the point where we should
begin taking more sophisticated approaches to the available
data.
It does seem to be the case that we are now developing an
appreciation for the limitations of such basic presence-absence
approaches, and there are some recent important exceptions
where researchers have provided robust frequency data on
ﬁre residues or proxy ﬁre data from individual sites. Two such
examples (and undoubtedly there are others) are the recent
work on evidence for ﬁre use at Tabun (Shimelmitz et al.
2014) and many of the recent publications on the ﬁre residues
at Gesher Benot Ya‘akov (Alperson-Aﬁl 2008, 2017; AlpersonAﬁl, Richter, and Goren-Inbar 2007; Karkanas et al. 2007),
where interpretation is based on quantiﬁable data that will
arguably be very little affected by taphonomic processes (speciﬁcally, burned ﬂints; see Aldeias 2017; Dibble et al. 2009,
2017; Sandgathe et al. 2011a). We would argue that our basic
understanding of when and where ﬁre was ﬁrst used and when
and where its use became regular is still, obviously, going to
depend heavily on detecting the presence of early examples
of clear anthropogenic ﬁre use. What needs to be done is to
use a more sophisticated version of what constitutes presence
and absence along with the use of more quantitative data and
analyses. We also need a more sophisticated understanding
of what we might view as the “background noise” of natural
ﬁre residues that presumably make up the majority of ﬁre
residues in the larger depositional record of a region (although
the ﬁres being of natural origin does not preclude them being
exploited by hominins).
We can, perhaps, suggest some general expectations about
how the overall evidence might present. At least initial ﬁre use
was probably dependent on access to and exploitation of natural ﬁre sources, which will typically be caused by lightning.
Because temperature and humidity are the biggest factors in
lightning frequencies, presence and absence and frequency of
use were probably spatially and temporally dependent because
access to natural ﬁre was dependent on climate and environment. Therefore, until people developed ﬁre-making techniques,
the pattern was probably one of intermittent ﬁre use depending, in large part, on the following.
• Latitude: we can expect to see initial, more frequent, and
more regular ﬁre use in warmer latitudes, where natural
ﬁre frequency was not (or was less) affected by global climate variability.

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

• Major climatic change: we can expect to see the gradual
appearance of intermittent ﬁre use at higher latitudes as
hominins began to use ﬁre more frequently, mainly corresponding to warm and wet climatic periods when natural
ﬁre was more readily available.
While much of the literature has presented arguments for evidence of “control of ﬁre,” the current data on Paleolithic ﬁre use
may simply be a reﬂection of a reliance on natural ﬁre sources,
which would be dependent on lightning frequencies through
time and across geographic space. For example, although hominins had been occupying higher, cooler latitudes in Europe
and Asia since well before 1.0 mya, the very earliest potential
evidence for ﬁre use (claims dating from 1.6 mya to 800 kya)
is in equatorial or subtropical latitudes (Africa and the Middle
East), where lightning frequencies would have remained relatively high throughout the Pleistocene because these regions
would not have been as affected by global climatic cycles as
higher latitudes were (ﬁg. 1).
Assuming all the current claims for very early hominin use
of ﬁre in these regions are correct, the data still reﬂect a very
spotty, intermittent record (e.g., Koobi Fora FxJj20 [Hlubik et al.
2017], Chesowanja in Kenya, Gadeb in Ethiopia, and Swartkrans and Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa). Furthermore, the
ﬁrst evidence of regionally based, repetitive or successive ﬁre use
is again restricted to subtropical latitudes beginning only between 800 and 400 kya (Gesher Benot Ya‘akov, Tabun, Qesem,
and Hayonim, all in Israel, and Cueva Negra in Spain). In latitudes above 357 north, the earliest potential evidence for any
ﬁre use is quite late, at ca. 400 kya (e.g., Beeches Pit in the United
Kingdom, Bilzingsleben in Germany, and Vértesszőlős in Hungary). Even after ﬁre does start appearing in Europe, the intermittent nature of the evidence throughout the late Middle and
early Late Pleistocene shows strong patterns of correspondence
to warmer climatic periods, which could still simply be reﬂecting
a reliance on natural ﬁre sources. These patterns are presented
in table 1, which is based on a limited literature review of evidence for ﬁre in 377 stratigraphic levels from 52 Lower and
Middle Paleolithic sites across Europe, with presence or absence
of ﬁre residues at all the components of these sites following
Roebroeks and Villa’s (2011) qualitative criteria.
While these data must be viewed with caution (see table 1
notes), they appear to show three important things. The ﬁrst
is that there is currently a single site with potential evidence
for hominin use of ﬁre in Europe before marine isotope stage
(MIS) 11, although we have clear evidence that hominins had
arrived there before MIS 35 and potentially by MIS 45 (Carbonell et al. 2008; Moyano et al. 2011). The second is that aside
from a complete lack of evidence from MIS 10 and 9, after this
there is a general, though not entirely consistent, trend toward
increasing frequency of ﬁre residues. The third is that while
there are examples of ﬁre use in later cold periods, there
appears to be a strong correlation between ﬁre frequencies and
warm periods. Taken at face value, this could be reﬂecting an
ongoing reliance on natural ﬁre sources. Intermittent ﬁre use

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sandgathe

Describing the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire

S365

Figure 1. Location of the earliest sites (by region) with potential evidence for hominin ﬁre use mapped onto the frequency distribution of lightning strikes today. In spite of the earliest appearance of hominins in different regions, the earliest evidence for ﬁre use
appears to follow a latitudinal pattern with the earliest sites located closer to the equator. The farther from the equator, the later the
dates of the earliest sites with potential hominin ﬁre use. This indicates that not only is there temporal patterning to the appearance of
ﬁre use, there is also a tentative geographic pattern that could be reﬂecting a reliance on natural ﬁres, the frequency of which will have
been strongly inﬂuenced by latitude. Darker areas indicate increased frequency of lightning strikes. Image modiﬁed from http://
geology.com/articles/lightning-map.shtml).

in Europe (beginning in the late Middle and continuing through
early Middle Late Pleistocene) and examples of longer-term,
successive ﬁre use in southwest Asia starting in the Middle
Pleistocene could be argued to be part of the same pattern:
in both cases, hominins relying on natural ﬁre that is predominantly a product of lightning frequency, which is strongly
associated with warm climatic conditions. If ﬁre-making techniques had been developed at this point and were widely employed, then there should be more examples in high-latitude
regions with clear evidence for long-term, successive ﬁre use.
In fact, if hominins could make ﬁre then, we might anticipate
a strong positive correlation between ﬁre residues and cold periods. The argument here is that an early, long-term reliance
on natural ﬁre sources is a very plausible explanation given the
available data. The main point that should be taken from this
is that even in the aggregate, the quality of our data and its potential to provide concrete interpretations are very limited and

cannot necessarily be argued to be clear evidence for hominins
having ﬁre-making technology during these time periods. Currently the archaeological evidence does not support a scenario
in which any hominins (in Europe, Asia, or Africa) were using
ﬁre regularly enough to suggest that it was an integral part of
their adaptation until sometime in the Late Pleistocene. Neither does the current evidence support a scenario in which the
existence of ﬁre-making technology can be recognized or inferred until very late as well. The implication is that the actual process of the development of pyrotechnology was more
complicated than has been presented in the literature so far.
We are at the point where we need to move beyond the concept of a point in time where all hominins have “control” of
ﬁre, which eventually leads to ﬁre use becoming “habitual”
among all hominins. So, when it comes to evidence for ﬁre use,
how do we describe what we are ﬁnding in the archaeological
record, and how do we describe our interpretations of it?

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S366

Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

Table 1. Percentage of stratigraphic components per marine isotope stage (MIS)
MIS
Evidence for ﬁre
0
1
2
3
Total
Total number of components

3

4–3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12–45

60.0
10.8
6.9
22.3
100
130

25.0
.0
7.1
67.9
100
28

55.0
25.0
12.5
7.5
100
40

58.8
2.1
20.6
18.6
100
97

81.8
13.6
.0
4.5
100
22

45.0
20.0
30.0
5.0
100
20

66.7
33.3
.0
.0
100
3

100.0
.0
.0
.0
100
3

.0
.0
.0
.0
0
0

50.0
.0
8.3
41.7
100
12

95.7
.0
4.3
.0
0
23

Note. No evidence for ﬁre p 0; possible evidence but insufﬁciently described or no supporting evidence p 1; good evidence of ﬁre p 2; clear evidence
of ﬁre p 3. The total number of components included for each stage is in the bottom row. Some components could only be placed in either MIS 3 or
MIS 4 (not one or the other), but the number was signiﬁcant, and their exclusion from the table would have biased the results. It needs to be stressed
that there are a number of potential issues with this type of data:

• The dating of sites and site components and their placement in speciﬁc MISs is often difﬁcult, and sometimes there are conﬂicting data. Because of
this, many more sites and site components were reviewed in the literature but were not included here because of issues with their dating.

• Different researchers use different criteria for distinguishing discrete layers, some reporting for lithostratigraphic units and some for archaeological
levels.

• For some sites, certain potential evidence for ﬁre might not have been reported, e.g., percent frequencies of burned lithics and burned bone.
• Some researchers might include mention of ﬁre residues for a speciﬁc site because they were found in at least one component of the site, but they do
not necessarily make it clear whether the residues occur in one, some, or all components.

• For some excavations (especially earlier ones) there might not be conﬁrmation that sediments/residues reported as charcoal or ash were actually
such residues.

• We can expect differential preservation patterns at closed versus open sites.

Developing Theoretical Models and Associated Terminology
A persistent topic in the symposium on which this supplemental issue of Current Anthropology is based was the nature
of the various levels of analysis and interpretation inherent in
trying to develop an understanding of the process of the
development of hominin use of ﬁre. However, any discussion
is immediately limited by the lack of any established theoretical model(s) for such a process and a lack of common
terms that researchers can use to explain their points of view.
Such discussions are necessarily going to involve different
categories of terminology depending on at what point we are
in the research process. Speciﬁcally, we can identify three
basic levels at which we might develop speciﬁc terminologies:
1. Describing archaeological phenomena: what terminology
do we use to describe the actual residues of ﬁre recovered
from archaeological sites?
2. Interpretation of archaeological phenomena: what terminology do we use to describe in what speciﬁc context we
think those residues were created? This would be sitespeciﬁc behavior.
3. The theoretical process of development of hominin interaction with ﬁre: what do we think is the broader behavioral context of the theoretical development of ﬁre use
in which these residues were created? This involves our
interpretation of the role of ﬁre in hominin adaptations.
Each of these levels already includes its own regularly used
terms, and at least some of these are also problematic. For example, among archaeological phenomena and their interpre-

tation, a commonly used term is “hearth,” which brings with it
inherent implications that may or may not be supported by the
actual ﬁre residues identiﬁed at a site. The terms “control” and
“habitual,” as they have generally been used in the literature, are
examples of attempts to describe stages of hominin use of ﬁre;
that is, they relate mainly to the third category, the process of the
development of hominin interaction with ﬁre. These terms either need to be replaced or at least be better deﬁned when they
are used. I would argue for the former because both terms have
already come to be so baggage laden.

Describing the Theoretical Process of Development
of Hominin Interaction with Fire
As discussed above, we can imagine a theoretical process of
the development of the interaction between ﬁre and people.
Realistically, there had to have been a development of increasing complexity of hominin association with ﬁre beginning from simple interaction with natural ﬁre in the environment (a very common thing in grassland environments) to
the eventual invention of ﬁre-making technologies (Clark and
Harris 1985; Pruetz and LaDuke 2010; Rolland 2004). Different researchers will undoubtedly have different ideas about
the pace and temporal scale of this development and the interpretation of what it means in terms of hominin adaptation. We should also take care not to intentionally couch this
development in terms of stages that imply directional progress
or linear movement. However, we are realistically talking about
levels of increased complexity. If individual “stages” in this in-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sandgathe

Describing the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire

creasing complexity are not viewed as necessary preconditions
for other stages, then we can avoid any implication of inherent
linear progress. In some cases, hominin groups may potentially
skip stages in the development of their use of ﬁre that other
hominins had gone through. However, practically speaking, it
will probably be the case that in most (pre)historic circumstances there were common stages in the development of the
use of ﬁre.
Another very important part of this discussion is the recognition that the use of ﬁre can be completely unrelated to
the maintenance or manufacture of ﬁre and could even involve
no real control of ﬁre. We can easily imagine such scenarios:
hominins simply cooking a piece of meat over burning vegetation resulting from natural ﬁre or, in an even less proximate
interaction with ﬁre, hominins intentionally foraging in burnedout areas shortly after a natural ﬁre has passed (Herzog et al.
2014; Pruetz and LaDuke 2010).
The goal should be to use terms that express logical levels
of increasing complexity or sophistication in the degree of
interaction between hominins and ﬁre. Starting at some point
in the past before which hominins were not interacting with
ﬁre at all, they probably began some sort of simple interaction
with ﬁre, which may be as basic as the suppression of ﬂight in
face of natural ﬁre (Clark and Harris 1985). This has been observed among chimpanzees (Pruetz and Herzog 2017; Pruetz
and LaDuke 2010). This would logically be followed by simple
use or application of ﬁre, such as simply using ﬁre for a task
regardless of how complicated the task, where that use occurs,
and how that ﬁre was acquired. The example, given above, of
hominins cooking food over naturally burning vegetation would
represent this level of interaction. Presumably, at some point
some hominins could begin to maintain ﬁre regardless of its
original source. This would involve adding fuel to vegetation
that had been set on ﬁre by a natural cause. Eventually hominins
would have developed techniques for the actual manufacture
and ignition of ﬁre, creating ﬁre where there was none. Based
on this (and on the work of others such as Pruetz and LaDuke
2010 and Monica L. Smith, personal communication, 2015) we
can suggest some concise, speciﬁc terminology that reﬂects these:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Habituation to natural ﬁre,
Use of ﬁre,
Maintenance of ﬁre,
Manufacture of ﬁre.

Over the long-term course of hominin evolution, there might
have been a consistent or common sequence to the appearance
of these levels of interaction with ﬁre. While not implicit or
necessary in all circumstances, logically, there is a certain degree
of directionality to this list as presumably a hominin species had
to become habituated to ﬁre before it could achieve the other
levels of interaction. Or, if it had the technology and know-how
to manufacture ﬁre, it had probably already spent some time
using and maintaining ﬁre. The use of ﬁre has to have been a
process like, for example, the development of lithic technologies.

S367

We would not expect to see Solutrean points in an Oldowan
assemblage. However, it is also the case that at some times and in
some places, groups may not have followed this sequence. For
example, for some groups, initial use and maintenance may
have developed at more or less the same time.
This sequence does not necessarily have to have occurred
just once in prehistory or at the same time and the same rate
among different hominin populations. For some populations,
simple use (with or without maintenance) may have been the
limit of their ﬁre use for very long periods of time before the
ability to manufacture ﬁre developed—if it did. In some regions (and time periods) high frequencies of natural ﬁres may
have provided some hominin groups with constant, reliable
access to ﬁre, limiting any pressure to develop ﬁre-maintenance
techniques or ﬁre-manufacture technologies. In other regions,
perhaps due to pressures resulting from low frequencies of
natural ﬁres or the importance of ﬁre in exploiting certain
resources, the development of ﬁre-manufacture technology
might occur very shortly after habituation. And in some regions and time periods, very low natural ﬁre frequencies and a
lack of ﬁre-making technology could have meant that the use
of ﬁre was simply not an important part of some hominin
populations’ adaptations (Henry 2017).
This terminology allows us to be interpretive about the archaeological record while avoiding unsupported presumptions
(an issue that, I would argue, exists with the terms “control”
and “habitual”). For example, depending on the speciﬁc details, we might be able to argue that ﬁre residues in a hominin
occupation are evidence of use and perhaps even maintenance,
but the terminology makes it clear that in the event that there is
no positive evidence that the hominins actually manufactured
the ﬁre, the interpretation ended there. We have the ability to
deal with the strong disassociation between questions we might
want to ask—could the hominins at this site make ﬁre?—and
our ability to answer them.

Conclusions
We do not yet have proper evidence to make big claims about
either the earliest ﬁre use or about when ﬁre use became a
regular component of technological repertoires and hominin
adaptations came to depend on it. What is becoming clear is
that our terminology, the approaches we take in our research,
and the interpretations we arrive at from our analysis should
start with some basic expectations about the course of the
development of pyrotechnology.
• The development of pyrotechnology must be assumed to
have been a long, drawn-out process that was probably relatively complex.
• Initial ﬁre use was probably intermittent with frequent ﬁts
and starts, and this might have been the situation for a
signiﬁcant part of subsequent prehistory.
• Initial ﬁre use was probably based on the exploitation of
natural ﬁre sources (mainly lightening-ignited vegetation

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S368

•

•
•
•

•

Current Anthropology

where and when available) and perhaps included simple
ﬁre maintenance at some times and in some places.
Before the development and discovery of ﬁre-making technology, it is unlikely that regular (“habitual”?) use of ﬁre
appeared among all hominins in all regions or even a single
region at the same time—it probably became more regular
in certain regions or with certain populations for periods of
time.
The discovery of ﬁre-manufacturing technology probably
occurred in multiple places and potentially even multiple
times in any one region.
Fire-manufacturing technology could well have been a relatively late development.
Such technology may very well have been lost and rediscovered multiple times as well, either through group ﬁssioning events or through local or regional extinction events of
hominin populations.
The evidence might suggest that ﬁre had come to be used
repeatedly and successively at a single site over a signiﬁcant
period of time, but this cannot be seen as de facto evidence
for the regular, constant use by a population over an entire
region, never mind a species.

The available data make it clear that before at least the Late
Pleistocene, hominins are not using ﬁre all the time. If the
evidence suggests that frequent ﬁre use among Middle Pleistocene European hominins (that is to say, high-latitude groups)
does not appear before 400 kya, and these hominins were not
using ﬁre regularly (especially during cold periods), then this
necessarily has implications for claims for any earlier ﬁre use in
Africa. If Lower and early Middle Pleistocene African hominins
were using ﬁre regularly (e.g., Tabun, Qesem) and knew how to
create it, then at least some groups would presumably take this
technology with them when they moved out of Africa into
higher, cooler latitudes. The bottom line is that the evidence
might be reﬂecting a much simpler scenario of ﬁre-use development:
• Very intermittent and strictly opportunistic use of naturally
available ﬁre during the Lower and early Middle Pleistocene
(e.g., Roebroeks and Villa 2011; Shimelmitz et al. 2014),
• More regular use of natural ﬁre sources beginning in the latter
half of the Middle Pleistocene—still mainly opportunistic
exploitation of natural ﬁre where and when it was regularly
available—with perhaps the occasional (local?) development
of ﬁre-making technology.
We need more objective and general terms to allow us to describe these presumed increases in the complexity of hominin
use of ﬁre over time. Some of the very early associations of
hominin occupations with ﬁre residues in south and east Africa
may simply reﬂect either the ubiquitous nature of natural ﬁres in
Africa or, perhaps, some level of habituation to (natural) ﬁre.
However, some of these hominin ﬁre-residue associations might

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

be the result of simple use of ﬁre. Determining at what point
hominins began ﬁre maintenance becomes more problematic,
and this is even more the case for manufacture of ﬁre. Before we
can seriously develop an understanding of the role of ﬁre in
hominin biocultural evolution and adaptation, we need a better
understanding of the nature of these stages, including when and
where they appeared and their subsequent durations.
A ﬁnal note is that the development of ﬁre-making techniques may also be dependent on biology and the emergence of
hominin species with the requisite cognitive abilities. However,
it should be stressed that ﬁre making is a learned behavior (and,
based on my own experience, very difﬁcult to accomplish using
traditional methods even if one knows theoretically exactly how
to do it), and the lack of ﬁre-making techniques is not an a
priori indication of reduced cognitive abilities any more than a
modern human society lacking computers would be.

Acknowledgments
I thank the other participants in the symposium “Fire and the
Genus Homo” for their knowledge, insight, sense of humor,
and lively discussion. I would also like to thank my fellow
guest editor, Francesco Berna. Thank you to the Wenner-Gren
Foundation, its president Leslie Aiello, and conference program
associate Laurie Obbink for making the symposium possible
and for ensuring that it ran smoothly. Thank you to the two
anonymous reviewers whose constructive suggestions improved this paper. Finally, many of the ideas in this paper are,
in large part, the product of discussions with my close colleagues Harold Dibble, Paul Goldberg, Shannon McPherron,
and Vera Aldeias over the last several years, and they deserve
my thanks for this.

References Cited
Aldeias, V., H. L. Dibble, D. Sandgathe, P. Goldberg, and S. J. McPherron.
2016. How heat alters underlying deposits and implications for archaeological ﬁre features: a controlled experiment. Journal of Archaeological Science 67:64–79.
Aldeias, V., P. Goldberg, D. M. Sandgathe, F. Berna, H. L. Dibble, S. P.
McPherron, and R. Zeljko. 2012. Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc
de Marsal (France). Journal of Archaeological Science 39(7):2414–2423, doi:
org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.01.039.
Aldeias, Vera. 2017. Experimental approaches to archaeological ﬁre features
and their behavioral relevance. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S191–
S205.
Alperson-Aﬁl, Nira. 2008. Continual ﬁre-making by hominins at Gesher
Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel. Quaternary Science Reviews 27:1733–1739.
———. 2012. Archaeology of ﬁre: methodological aspects of reconstructing
ﬁre history of prehistoric archaeological sites. Earth-Science Reviews 113:
111–119.
———. 2017. Spatial analysis of ﬁre: archaeological approach to recognizing
early ﬁre. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S258–S266.
Alperson-Aﬁl, Nira, Daniel Richter, and Naama Goren-Inbar. 2007. Phantom
hearths and the use of ﬁre at Gesher Benot Ya‘akov, Israel. Palaeoanthropology 2007:1–15.
Attwell, Laura, Kris Kovarovic, and Jeremy R. Kendal. 2015. Fire in the PlioPleistocene: the functions of hominin ﬁre use, and the mechanistic, developmental and evolutionary consequences. Journal of Anthropological
Sciences 93:1–20.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sandgathe

Describing the Evolution of Hominin Use of Fire

Barbetti, M. 1986. Traces of ﬁre in the archaeological record, before one
million years ago? Journal of Human Evolution 15(8):771–781.
Barkai, Ran, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, and Avi Gopher. 2017. Fire for a
reason: barbecue at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S314–S328.
Bar Yosef, O., A. Belfer-Cohen, P. Goldberg, S. L. Kuhn, L. Meignen, B. Vandermeersch, and S. Weiner. 2005. Archaeological background to Hayonim
Cave and Meged Rockshelter. In The faunas of Hayonim Cave: a 200,000-year
record of Paleolithic diet, demography, and society. M. C. Stiner and O. BarYosef, eds. Pp. 17–38. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology.
Bellomo, R. 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological
evidence of ﬁre resulting from human activities. Journal of Archaeological
Science 20:525–554.
———. 1994. Methods of determining early hominid behavioral activities
associated with the controlled use of ﬁre at FxJj 20, Main, Koobi Fora,
Kenya. Journal of Human Evolution 27:173–195.
Bentsen, Silje Evjenth. 2014. Using pyrotechnology: ﬁre-related features and
activities with a focus on the African Middle Stone Age. Journal of Archaeological Research 22(2014):141–175, doi: 10.1007/s10814-013-9069-x.
Berna, Francesco, Paul Goldberg, Liora Kolska Horwitz, James Brink, Sharon
Holt, Marion Bamford, and Michael Chazan. 2012. Microstratigraphic
evidence of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave,
Northern Cape Province, South Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA 109:7593–7594.
Blasco, Ruth, Jordi Rosell, Pablo Sanudo, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2015.
What happens around a ﬁre: faunal processing sequences and spatial distribution at Qesem Cave (300 ka), Israel. Quaternary International 398:
190–209.
Brown, K. 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of early modern humans. Science
325:859, doi: 10.1126/science.1175028.
Canti, M. G., and N. Linford. 2000. The effects of ﬁre on archaeological soils
and sediments: temperature and colour relationships. Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society 66:385–395.
Carbonell, E., J. M. B. de Castro, J. M. Parés, A. Pérez-González, G. CuencaBescós, A. Ollé, M. Mosquera, et al. 2008. The ﬁrst hominin of Europe.
Nature 452(7186):465–469.
Chazan, Michael. 2017. Toward a long prehistory of ﬁre. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S351–S359.
Clark, J. D., and J. W. K. Harris. 1985. Fire and its roles in early hominid
lifeways. African Archaeological Review 3:3–27.
Daniau, A.-L., F. d’Errico, and M. Fernanda Sanchez Goni. 2011. Testing the
hypothesis of ﬁre use for ecosystem management by Neanderthal and
Upper Palaeolithic modern human populations. PLoS ONE 5(2):e9157.
Dibble, H., F. Berna, P. Goldberg, S. McPherron, S. Mentzer, L. Niven, D.
Richter, D. Sandgathe, I. Thery Parisot, and A. Turq. 2009. A preliminary
report on Pech de l’Azé IV, Layer 8 (Middle Palaeolithic, France). PaleoAnthropology 2009:182–219.
Dibble, Harold L., Aylar Abodolahzadeh, Vera Aldeias, Paul Goldberg,
Shannon P. McPherron, and Dennis M. Sandgathe. 2017. How did hominins
adapt to Ice Age Europe without ﬁre? Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):
S278–S287.
Goldberg, P., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1998. Site formation processes in Kebara and
Hayonim Caves and their signiﬁcance in Levantine prehistoric caves. In
Neandertals and Modern Humans in Western Asia. T. Akazawa, K. Aoki,
and O. Bar-Yosef, eds. Pp. 107–126. New York: Plenum.
Goldberg, P., H. L. Dibble, F. Berna, D. M. Sandgathe, S. J. P. McPherron, and
A. Turq. 2012. New evidence on Neandertal use of ﬁre: examples from Roc
de Marsal and Pech de l’Azé IV. Quaternary International 247(1):325–340.
Goldberg, P., S. Weiner, O. Bar-Yosef, Q. Xu, and J. Liu. 2001. Site formation
processes at Zhoukoudian, China. Journal of Human Evolution 41:483–530.
Goldberg, Paul, Christopher E. Miller, and Susan M. Mentzer. 2017. Recognizing ﬁre in the Paleolithic archaeological record. Current Anthropology 58
(suppl. 16):S175–S190.
Goren-Inbar, N., N. Alperson, M. E. Kislev, O. Simchoni, Y. Melamed, A.
Ben-Nun, and E. Werker. 2004. Evidence of hominin control of ﬁre at
Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel. Science 304:725–727.
Goudsblom, Johan. 1986. The human monopoly on the use of ﬁre: its origins
and conditions. Human Evolution 1(6):517–523.
Gowlett, J. A. J., J. S. Brink, Adam Caris, Sally Hoare, and S. M. Rucina. 2017. Evidence of burning from bushﬁres in southern and east Africa and its relevance
to hominin evolution. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S206–S216.

S369
Gowlett, J. A. J., J. Hallos, S. Hounsell, V. Brant, and N. C. Debenham.
2005. Beeches Pit: archaeology, assemblage dynamics and early ﬁre history of a Middle Pleistocene site in East Anglia, UK. Eurasian Prehistory
3(2):3–38.
Gowlett, J. A. J., J. W. K. Harris, D. Walton, and B. A. Wood. 1981. Early
archaeological sites, hominid remains and traces of ﬁre from Chesowanja,
Kenya. Nature 294:125–129.
Gowlett, J. A. J., and R. W. Wrangham. 2013. Earliest ﬁre in Africa: towards
the convergence of archaeological evidence and the cooking hypothesis.
Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 48(1):5–30.
Henry, Amanda G. 2017. Neanderthal cooking and the costs of ﬁre. Current
Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S329–S336.
Herzog, N. M., C. H. Parker, E. R. Keefe, J. Coxworth, A. Barrett, and K.
Hawkes. 2014. Fire and home range expansion: a behavioral response to
burning among savanna dwelling vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops).
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 154(4):554–560.
Hlubik, Sarah, Francesco Berna, Craig Feibel, David Braun, and John W. K.
Harris. 2017. Researching the nature of ﬁre at 1.5 Mya on the site of FxJj20
AB, Koobi Fora, Kenya, using high-resolution spatial analysis and FTIR
spectrometry. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S243–S257.
Isaac, G. 1982. Early hominids and ﬁre at Chesowanja, Kenya. Nature 296:870.
James, Steven R. 1989. Hominid use of ﬁre in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene. Current Anthropology 30(1):1–26.
Karkanas, Panagiotis, Ruth Shahack-Gross, Avner Ayalon, Mira Bar-Matthews,
Ran Barkai, Amos Frumkin, Avi Gopher, and Mary C. Stiner. 2007. Evidence
for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the Lower Paleolithic: site-formation
processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 53(2):197–
212.
March, Ramiro J. 1992. L’utilisation du bois dans les foyers préhistoriques:
une approche expérimentale. Bulletin de la Société Botanique de France:
Actualités Botaniques 139(2–4):245–253.
Moyano, I. T., D. Barsky, D. Cauche, V. Celiberti, S. Grégoire, F. Lebegue,
M. H. Moncel, and H. De Lumley. 2011. The archaic stone tool industry
from Barranco León and Fuente Nueva 3 (Orce, Spain): evidence of the earliest hominin presence in southern Europe. Quaternary International 243(1):
80–91.
Parker, C. H., E. R. Keefe, N. M. Herzog, J. F. O'Connell, and K. Hawkes.
2016. The pyrophilic primate hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues,
News, and Reviews 25(2):54–63.
Peters, M. E., and P. E. Higuera. 2007. Quantifying the source area of macroscopic charcoal with a particle dispersal model. Quaternary Research 67:
304–310.
Pickering, T. R., C. P. Egeland, M. Domínguez-Rodrigo, C. K. Brain, and A. G.
Schnell. 2008. Testing the “shift in the balance of power” hypothesis at
Swartkrans, South Africa: hominid cave use and subsistence behavior in the
Early Pleistocene. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 27:30–45.
Pruetz, J. D., and T. C. LaDuke. 2010. Brief communication: reaction to ﬁre by
savanna chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) at Fongoli, Senegal: conceptualization of “ﬁre behavior” and the case for a chimpanzee model. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 141(4):646–650.
Pruetz, Jill D., and Nicole M. Herzog. 2017. Savanna chimpanzees at Fongoli,
Senegal, navigate a ﬁre landscape. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S337–
S350.
Roebroeks, W., and P. Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
108(13):5209–5214.
Rolland, N. 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic ﬁre a punctuated event? a review of the Middle Pleistocene record in Eurasia. Asian
Perspectives 43(2):248–280.
Rowlett, Ralph M. 2000. Fire control by Homo erectus in East Africa and Asia.
Acta Anthropologica Sinica 19(suppl.):198–208.
Sandgathe, D. M., H. L. Dibble, P. Goldberg, S. P. McPherron, A. Turq, L.
Niven, and J. Hodgkins. 2011a. On the role of ﬁre in Neandertal adaptations
in Western Europe: evidence from Pech de l’Azé IV and Roc de Marsal,
France. Paleoanthropology 2011:216–242.
———. 2011b. Timing of the appearance of habitual ﬁre use. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108(29):E298.
Sandgathe, Dennis M., and Francesco Berna. 2017. Fire and the genus Homo:
an introduction to supplement 16. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):
S165–S174.
Schiegl, S., P. Goldberg, O. Bar-Yosef, and S. Weiner. 1996. Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara Caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and miner-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S370

Current Anthropology

alogical observations, and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 23:763–781.
Shahack-Gross, R., F. Berna, P. Karkanas, C. Lemorini, A. Gopher, and R. Barkai.
2014. Evidence for the repeated use of a central hearth at Middle Pleistocene
(300 ky ago) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 44:12–21.
Shimelmitz, R., S. L. Kuhn, A. J. Jelinek, A. Ronen, A. E. Clark, and M.
Weinstein-Evron. 2014. “Fire at will”: the emergence of habitual ﬁre use
350,000 years ago. Journal of Human Evolution 77:196–203.

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

Stahlschmidt, M. C., C. E. Miller, B. Ligouis, U. Hambach, P. Goldberg, F.
Berna, D. Richter, B. Urban, J. Serangeli, and N. J. Conard. 2015. On the
evidence for human use and control of ﬁre at Schöningen. Journal of
Human Evolution 89:181–201.
Walker, M. J., D. Anesin, D. E. Angelucci, A. Avilés-Fernández, F. Berna, A. T.
Buitrago-López, Y. Fernández-Jalvo, et al. 2016. Combustion at the late
Early Pleistocene site of Cueva Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar (Murcia,
Spain). Antiquity 90(351):571–589.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:04:40 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

