Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

S175

Recognizing Fire in the Paleolithic
Archaeological Record
by Paul Goldberg, Christopher E. Miller, and Susan M. Mentzer
Everyone agrees that ﬁre has played an important part in the history of the genus Homo. However, because of the
sometimes ephemeral and ambiguous nature of the evidence for ﬁre in the Paleolithic record, establishing when and how
hominins actively interacted with ﬁre has been difﬁcult. Over the past several decades, multiple techniques have been
developed and employed in the search for the origins of human use of ﬁre. Because ﬁre is a natural phenomenon, the
identiﬁcation of burned remains at an archaeological site is generally not considered to be, on its own, convincing
evidence for human use of ﬁre. Rather, much of the difﬁculty of identifying early evidence for ﬁre use has hinged on the
question of how to establish a more direct link between burned materials and human activity. Here, we advocate for an
approach to the investigation of the history of hominin use of ﬁre that emphasizes an integration of multiple techniques.
In particular, we argue that a contextualized study conducted at the microscopic scale—what we call a microcontextual
approach—shows the most promise for establishing a behavioral connection between hominins and ﬁre in the archaeological record.

Prelude
Look at ﬁgure 1. On a recent trip to the high Andes of Peru,
Susan Mentzer and Chris Miller stopped to stretch their legs
during the long ascent to the Puna. They pulled over onto the
side of the rut-worn road and took in the sparsely vegetated
landscape. “Look over there,” Susan said. “A ruined house.”
Kurt Rademaker, who was leading the expedition, spoke up:
“Yeah, there are lots of those up here. Some of them date to Inca
or even pre-Inca times.” Mentzer and Miller got out of the truck
crammed with students and equipment and headed over. The
remnants of the stone walls still provided a clear outline of the

Paul Goldberg is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Archaeology at Boston University (675 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA [paulberg@bu.edu]), at the Institute for
Archaeological Sciences at the University of Tübingen (Rümelinstrasse
23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany), and at the School of Earth and Environmental Sciences of the University of Wollongong (Wollongong,
New South Wales 2502, Australia). Christopher E. Miller is Professor
at the Institute for Archaeological Sciences at the University of Tübingen (Rümelinstrasse 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany [christopher
.miller@uni-tuebingen.de]) and at the Senckenberg Centre for Human
Evolution and Paleoenvironment (Rümelinstrasse 23, 72070 Tübingen,
Germany). Susan M. Mentzer is a Research Scientist at the Institute for
Archaeological Sciences at the University of Tübingen (Rümelinstrasse
23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany [susan.mentzer@ifu.uni-tuebingen.de])
and at the School of Anthropology at the University of Arizona (1009
East South Campus Drive, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA). This paper
was submitted 25 VII 16, accepted 21 III 17, and electronically published
6 VII 17.

structure, with obvious doorways and subdivisions of rooms.
But the house had clearly been abandoned for a long time
since shrubs and other vegetation now grew throughout the
building.
“Hey,” Mentzer said excitedly. “Look at this! There was a
bushﬁre!” Sure enough, many of the shrubs outside the structure had been burned, with ashes and charcoal collected in neat
circles below the charred remains of branches.
“Wow,” Miller said. “Some of the shrubs inside the ruin are
burned too!” Maybe it was the low oxygen of the high Andes,
but their minds began to wander. Shooting each other a knowing glance, they started to think of what this ruin would look
like to archaeologists in the future.
“It’s clearly a bushﬁre,” Miller said. “You can see where it
started over there at the base of the hill.”
“Yeah, but it didn’t burn evenly across the surface . . . the
vegetation is patchy and so each shrub, when it burned, left
a circular feature of charcoal and ash behind.”
“So it’s natural.”
“Yes, but some of the shrubs inside the house also burned
and left those circular patches. You know,” Mentzer said, “in
ten or twenty years, or if this site ever becomes buried, those
patches would look a lot like hearths to archaeologists.”
“Yeah,” Miller said, a bit despondently.
“And these burned patches are natural, but they are associated with an archaeological site. And since the burned patches
are inside the structure, it would be easy to assume that they
are hearths,” Mentzer said.
“Yeah,” Miller said again. “But how could archaeologists distinguish between a natural ﬁre like this and a hearth?”

q 2017 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2017/58S16-0003$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/692729

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S176

Current Anthropology

Figure 1. Archaeological site affected by a recent brush ﬁre in Peru.
A, Shrubs growing within and around an abandoned stone structure have been differentially affected by brush ﬁres. One concentration of burned shrubs (arrow) is located in the center of the room.
B, Detail of the burned shrubs pictured in A. The burning reached
an intensity such that round concentrations of charcoal and ashes
formed. A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.

“Easy,” Mentzer replied. “If you can date the house architecture stylistically, and then run a radiocarbon date on the
charcoal from the hearth, you could see that they wouldn’t
match, assuming that there is a large enough hiatus between
abandonment and the bushﬁre.”
“OK,” Miller said after a long pause. “But what if this
weren’t a historical site, but a Paleolithic site?”
They stared at each other without saying a word and silently
returned to the truck to continue the ascent into the mountains.1

Introduction
Fire—as with any aspect of the past studied by archaeologists—
requires us to establish clear theoretical links between exca-

1. This is a ﬁctionalized account of a true event. The dialogue has been
changed and some literary license has been taken, but the scientiﬁc concerns are real.

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

vated material remains and human activities and behavior. In
sites from most time periods, the evidence for anthropogenic
ﬁre can appear to be quite convincing: constructed hearths, kilns,
and other installations can be readily compared with analogous
features known from historic and ethnographic studies (GurArieh et al. 2013). Similarly, the presence of ceramic sherds,
glass, bricks, metal, and slag all clearly point to the control of
ﬁre for craft and industrial practices in the past.
Archaeological evidence for the use of ﬁre becomes spottier
when dealing with hunter-gatherer or other nonsedentary societies, particularly those from the Pleistocene. Although some
Upper Paleolithic people lined and paved their hearths with
clay and stone (Karkanas et al. 2004; Movius 1966), thus making them more readily identiﬁable by archaeologists, most evidence for ﬁre in the Pleistocene takes the form of scatters and
concentrations of charcoal, ash, burned bone, heated stone, and
reddened substrates. Recognizing and interpreting these materials as evidence for use of ﬁre, let alone control or production
of ﬁre, can be difﬁcult (see Sandgathe 2017 for deﬁnitions of use,
control, and production of ﬁre). Furthermore, this difﬁculty
is only compounded the farther back in time we look when we
search for the origins of hominin interactions with ﬁre.
The evidence for ﬁre that we encounter in the archaeological record can be different from many other types of artifacts
found at Paleolithic sites. Unlike handaxes, cave paintings, or
butchered bones, materials such as charcoal, ash, and other
burned remains can be produced by humans but also by natural processes. Evidence for naturally occurring ﬁres in the form
of preserved charcoal is known from the geological record dating to the Devonian, more than 350 Mya (Scott 2000). Similarly, Bordes (1957) reports evidence for heated chert from deposits dating to the Miocene. Fire is essentially a natural chemical
reaction that humans have learned to anticipate, use, control,
and produce.
The difﬁculties of ﬁrst identifying heated materials in the Paleolithic record and second determining whether humans were
the agents responsible have been recognized by archaeologists
since at least the mid-twentieth century (Oakley 1954). Later
researchers, in particular Barbetti (1986), formalized the problem: “Demonstrating that ﬁre was used at an archaeological site
is a two-step process. One must ﬁrst ﬁnd the evidence and show
that ﬁre was present. It is then necessary to demonstrate that
it was associated with human activity” (771).
In the 30 years since Barbetti laid out the two-step process of
evaluating evidence for ﬁre in the archaeological record, many
new methods and techniques have been introduced that aid
in identifying burned materials at Paleolithic sites. Similarly,
many new sites have been excavated and novel studies conducted that help us evaluate the nature of the association of
burned materials and human activity. However, despite these
advances, Barbetti’s two-step approach should still form the
foundation for any archaeological study of ﬁre.
Therefore, in this paper, we have decided to revisit and expand on Barbetti’s arguments, focusing on how we address
the following three questions about materials encountered in

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

archaeological sites: (1) Are they burned? (2) Were they recovered from the primary location of heating, and if not, what
is the nature of their deposition? and (3) Were they burned by
humans?
We will present a range of approaches to identifying heated
materials from archaeological sites. But we will also show how
positive results—those that show that materials have been
heated—do not alone constitute sufﬁcient evidence for human
use of ﬁre. Rather, we argue that these techniques need to be
applied in conjunction with high-resolution analyses of site
formation processes in order to form a link between material
evidence for heating and human behavior.

The Microcontextual Approach
The microcontextual approach was put forward by Goldberg
and Berna (2010) from concepts developed by researchers such
as Boivin (2004), Goldberg and Macphail (2006), Matthews
(2005), and Matthews et al. (1997). It is essentially the in situ
analysis of microscopic components in thin section using a variety of microanalytical techniques. The microcontextual approach provides a framework for the integration of these data
by extending the context of an archaeological artifact—its
matrix, its provenience, and its associations with other artifacts
(Renfrew and Bahn 2007)—to the microscopic scale. In this
framework, we treat individual particles of anthropogenic sediments as artifacts and microscopic deposits as assemblages
(ﬁg. 2). This approach has proven successful in the analysis of
combustion features and burned materials in sites of all ages,
ranging from the Paleolithic (Goldberg and Berna 2010) to the
Iron Age (Mentzer, Romano, and Voyatzis 2015; Toffolo et al.
2012).
The most effective and efﬁcient way to monitor and control
for (micro)context is the use of soil micromorphology (Courty,
Goldberg, and Macphail 1989; Goldberg and Macphail 2006;
Macphail and Cruise 2001), which is the meso- and microscopic analysis of intact blocks of sediments or soils that have
been indurated, sliced, polished, and prepared into thin sections (Courty, Goldberg, and Macphail 1989). Observations
made on micromorphological samples can include the mineralogical and organic composition of sedimentary components;
the size, shape and sorting of grains; the porosity and microstructure of deposits; the presence of bedding or other microscopic sedimentary structures; and the fabric—the internal organization of all these attributes (Bullock et al. 1985; Courty,
Goldberg, and Macphail 1989; Stoops 2003). Furthermore, micromorphological analysis can reveal both physical and chemical postdepositional alteration of deposits that may be related
to either natural or human agents. Anthropogenic physical alteration might include trampling or reworking of combustion
residues by dumping, middening, or hearth rake out. Natural,
chemical alteration might entail dissolution of ashes or bone
or the secondary precipitation of carbonates or phosphates. Because the use of micromorphology facilitates the analysis of
postdepositional alteration and enables the distinction between

S177

natural and anthropogenic sediments, it is widely used as a
ﬁrst-order approach to the study of combustion features and
burned materials (Berna and Goldberg 2008; Mentzer 2013;
Miller, Goldberg, and Berna 2013).
A number of additional microanalytical techniques outlined
in table 1 can be conducted on either loose sediment or materials present in micromorphology samples. Ideally, a study
of evidence for ﬁre applies the same techniques on both loose
and micromorphological samples, thereby supporting the integration of results obtained microscopically with observations
made at the site scale. Deﬁned narrowly (or optimistically), a
microcontextual approach to the study of a combustion feature might mean that every analysis conducted as part of the
study should be conducted directly on materials visible in a
micromorphological thin section or in its corresponding indurated sediment block.
Micromorphology and a microcontextual approach can also
be used as a type of “methodological ﬁlter” for determining which additional techniques could be applied to identify
heating and to assess the depositional association of heated
materials with other traces of human activity. In the possible
combustion feature illustrated in ﬁgure 2, observation of three
types of potentially heated material and fuel residues as well as
anthropogenic inclusions (ﬁg. 2B) lead to an analytical trajectory that includes micro-FTIR (m-FTIR; Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy), organic petrology, and the scanning electron microscope (SEM; ﬁg. 2E). Similarly, the microcontextual
approach can also help discourage the use of certain other
techniques that may be unnecessary or produce misleading results. In the same example, the observation that the suspected
ashes have been chemically altered (ﬁg. 2C) precludes the
measurement of stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen from the
calcareous ashes (Mentzer and Quaid 2013). A microcontextual
study ideally does not focus on a single feature or only on potential evidence for human use of ﬁre. Rather, microcontextual
analyses should be part of a broader geoarchaeological study
that attempts to understand how potential evidence for use of
ﬁre ﬁts within a holistic site formation model.

Examples
Roebroeks and Villa (2011), in their assessment and ranking
of sites containing evidence for early use of ﬁre, give particular
weight to studies that identify combustion features. In particular, they privilege studies that employ micromorphology or
use multiple analytical techniques over those that rely on only
one method or on one line of evidence. The microcontextual
approach, by providing a methodological and theoretical link
between multiple analytical techniques and micromorphology,
is therefore ideally suited for the study of Paleolithic ﬁre. In
practice, this has only been carried out to a limited extent.
Many of the techniques for studying burned materials were
developed ﬁrst using loose sediment samples, and only recently
have they been applied to micromorphological samples. For
example, Shahack-Gross et al. (2008) ﬁrst investigated the

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 2. Application of the microcontextual approach to a suspected combustion feature. A, Middle Stone Age deposits in the site of
Sibudu, South Africa, contain discrete features (arrow) that appear in the ﬁeld to be composed of charred material overlain by ashes.
These features were sampled for micromorphological analysis. For more detailed information about the micromorphology at this site,
see Goldberg et al. (2009). B, Thin section prepared from a different feature but with similar characteristics (incident light scan). The
area photographed in parts C and D is indicated with the red box. C, Feature viewed using a petrographic microscope (plane-polarized
light; PPL) can be likened to a microscopic stratigraphic section containing what appears to be a basal layer of rubiﬁed sediment (Ru)
overlain by charred plant fragments (Ch) and topped with ashes (Ash). The sequence also contains microscopic artifacts such as bone
fragments (B) and lithic debitage (L). The depositional history of the three layers is clear at this scale of observation. The contacts are
gradational over several millimeters with no indication that they are derived from discrete depositional events. This relationship is
consistent with a formation model for intact hearths proposed by Meignen et al. (2001). Each of the materials visible in this feature can
be analyzed using additional techniques described in table 1. The bone fragments and charred plants can be analyzed using organic
petrology. The ash layer can be investigated at higher resolution using a petrographic microscope or SEM, which facilitates morphological identiﬁcations of different components (e.g., ash rhombs, phytoliths). The molecular and elemental compositions of the bones

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

isotopic composition of ashes using experimental materials and
archaeological samples from the site of Amud Cave (Israel).
This approach was extended to micromorphological samples
several years later (Mentzer and Quade 2013). Moreover, until
recently, many microanalytical instruments were available to
archaeologists on a limited basis. Nevertheless, there are a few
cases in which a microcontextual study was conducted on
Paleolithic ﬁre features (Berna and Goldberg 2008; Berna et al.
2012; Goldberg and Berna 2010; Lowe et al. 2016; Mallol,
Mentzer, and Miller, forthcoming; Shahack-Gross et al. 2014;
Stahlschmidt et al. 2015). Here, we draw on several examples
from three Lower Paleolithic sites to illustrate how the approach can yield positive, negative, and ambiguous results. At
the end, we highlight an application where we believe the approach is most promising: in the analysis of traces of ﬁre that
have been affected by postdepositional processes.
Positive Results from Qesem Cave
Microcontextual analyses have been essential in establishing
some of the earliest clear evidence for repeated use of ﬁre by
humans. At Qesem Cave (Israel), which is associated with an
Acheulo-Yabrudian occupation that dates between ca. 400 and
200 kya (Barkai et al. 2003; Gopher et al. 2005; Karkanas et al.
2007), researchers conducted a microcontextual study that relied heavily on micromorphology but was augmented with
other techniques, such as FTIR analysis on loose sediment
samples and bones and isotopic analysis of calcareous deposits.
The analysis on loose sediment samples returned negative or
ambiguous results. For example, FTIR analysis of loose sediment did not reveal any evidence that the clay fraction of the
cave deposits had been heated to above 5007C. In addition,
no phytoliths or siliceous aggregates were found in the acidinsoluble fraction of the loose samples, possibly reﬂecting unfavorable preservation conditions in the alkaline environment
of the cave. However, in thin section, Karkanas et al. (2007)
identiﬁed clear evidence for ﬁre in the form of numerous examples of calcareous ashes. The authors reported that at a microscopic scale, the ashes were found in discrete layers, generally
2 cm thick and in association with small fragments of burned
bone and clay-rich soil aggregates that appeared reddened and
probably heated. Supporting the micromorphological evidence
for ﬁre at the site, FTIR analysis of bone showed that some
fragments contained pyrolyzed collagen, and some were cal-

S179

cined. Similarly, carbon and oxygen isotopic analysis suggested
that at least some of the deposits at the site consisted of recrystallized ashes or a mixture of ashes and geogenic calcite.
At Qesem, a combination of micromorphology, FTIR, and
isotopic analyses clearly demonstrated the presence of ﬁre. However, it was the contextualization of these analyses at the microscopic scale that allowed the authors to demonstrate that
the burned remains were probably related to human behavior.
Karkanas et al. (2007) point out that some authors (e.g., Harrold and Otte 2001) argue that natural ﬁres, such as those caused
by lightning strikes or spontaneous combustion of guano, could
account for the presence of burned materials in caves. In contrast, Karkanas et al. (2007) argue that spontaneous combustion is unlikely because these types of ﬁres require signiﬁcant
amounts of organic material that were generally absent from
the deposits. Additionally, guano ﬁres, according to the authors,
burn at relatively low temperatures and do not produce completely combusted remains. At Qesem, much of the evidence
for ﬁre consists of completely combusted wood (in the form of
ashes) and charred and calcined bones, which generally would
be expected to occur with higher-temperature ﬁres. The most
convincing argument is that small fragments of burned bone
are found in thin, discrete lenses composed of pure ash. The
micromorphological study documented the repetitive occurrence of these distinct “microcontexts” throughout the sequence at Qesem, thereby providing strong evidence for the
repeated use of ﬁre by the site’s inhabitants.
A further study at Qesem (Shahack-Gross et al. 2014) focused on a 300 kya stone-lined feature and employed a broader
range of microcontextual analyses. The ca. 4 m2 feature was
lined by a ring of rocks and contained laminated deposits
within it (Shahack-Gross et al. 2014). In addition to micromorphology and FTIR analysis on loose sediment samples
from the laminated deposits, the authors also conducted
m-FTIR measurements directly on thin sections including bone
fragments and soil aggregates. These measurements conﬁrmed
that the bone fragments found in association within the laminations of ashes were burned to above 5007C. The authors also
demonstrated the presence of clay aggregates that had been
heated to above 4007C. The identiﬁcation of heated clay aggregates using m-FTIR in the ash laminations shows in particular the strength of the microcontextual approach because previous FTIR analysis of loose sediments did not provide any
clear evidence for heating of clays above 5007C at the site.

and ashes can be documented using m-FTIR and SEM-EDS. D, Same view as C, cross polarized light. Analyses with a light microscope
provide some information about the composition of certain materials, serving as a methodological ﬁlter for further investigations. Here,
the ash layer is isotropic, which indicates that it is not composed of calcite, a primary mineral constituent of wood ash (Canti 2003;
Shahack-Gross and Ayalon 2013). Additional analyses that address the composition of this layer are warranted. E, Observation of the
“ash” layer under higher magniﬁcation and PPL reveals that the characteristic morphologies of ash components (Canti 2003) are absent.
F, Analyses of the area in E using m-FTIR reveal the presence of two main phases. The spectrum in red contains peaks indicative of
phosphate (Ph) and silicates (Si), further identiﬁed as apatite and quartz, respectively. The spectrum in blue contains peaks indicative of
an amorphous silicate, such as opal. Resin peaks (R) are also present. Volumetric replacement of ashes with phosphatic minerals has
been documented in other Paleolithic contexts (Karkanas and Goldberg 2010; Goldberg et al. 2007). In this case, the micromorphology
and m-FTIR results neither support nor refute the hypothesis that the feature is an intact hearth, but further microcontextual analyses of
other components may prove more fruitful in the future.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S180

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Phytolith analysis:
• Phytoliths extracted from loose
sediment samples
• In situ observation of phytoliths
visible in micromorphological
samples

XRD:b
• Loose sediment samples
and artifacts (bone, lithics)
• In situ measurements on
micromorphological samples
using micro-XRD
SEM-EDS:c
• Loose sediment samples
• In situ measurements on polished or
carbon-coated micromorphological
samples

FTIR:a
• Loose sediment samples
• Heated lithics and rocks
• In situ measurements on intact
blocks and thin sections collected
for micromorphological analyses
using m-FTIR

Micromorphology:
• Oriented blocks of sediment
indurated with resin and processed
into petrographic thin sections

Analytical technique, sample type

Yes. Measurements of the refractive
index of individual phytoliths can
be used to determine heating.

No.

Elemental abundance for major and
trace elements (Na through U);
output in the form of spectra

Qualitative description of phytolith
morphology; quantitative information from analysis of populations

Yes. Certain materials (e.g., clay
minerals, bone) can be analyzed
to document molecular changes that
occur with heating.

Yes. Certain materials (e.g., clay
minerals, bone) can be analyzed
to document molecular changes that
occur with heating.

Yes. Can be used to identify some
by-products of combustion based
on mineralogical composition and
morphology (e.g., ashes).

Used to identify presence/
absence of heating?

Spacing and arrangement of atoms in
a crystal lattice; output in the form
of diffraction patterns

Type and strength of molecular bonds;
output in the form of spectra

Visual observation of sedimentary
components using a petrographic
microscope and different sources of
light (plane-polarized, cross polarized,
darkﬁeld, ﬂuorescent, reﬂected,
oblique incident)

Type of information/data

Table 1. Geoscientiﬁc analytical techniques for the study of ancient ﬁre

Identiﬁcation of phytoliths to plant
type based on morphology can be
used to study the types of fuels in
hearths.

When one mineral phase is present,
the relative abundance of elements
can be used to estimate the chemical
formula and identify the mineral.
Used primarily for the study of
diagenesis of burned materials.

Can be used to identify primary and
secondary minerals. Can be used
to study heat treatment of lithic
materials.

Provides temperature ranges of heating
for bone and clay minerals; can also
be used to identify primary and
secondary minerals. Under ideal
preservation conditions, pyrogenic
calcite can be distinguished from
geogenic calcite.

Allows the analyst to observe the
spatial relationship between different
components of the feature. Fabric
and structure can be used to make
interpretations about depositional
context. Other components provide
information about postdepositional
history.

Other information

Albert, Berna, and Goldberg 2012;
Albert and Cabanes 2007;
Albert et al. 1999, 2000;
Cabanes et al. 2010; Elbaum et al.
2003; Madella et al. 2002;
Piperno 2006

Karkanas 2010; Karkanas et al. 2002;
Schiegl et al. 1996

Domanski and Webb 1992;
Rogers and Daniels 2002;
Schmidt et al. 2012, 2013;
Weymouth and Mandeville 1975

Berna et al. 2007; Forget et al. 2015;
Goldberg and Berna 2010;
Regev et al. 2010; Thompson,
Islam, and Bonniere 2013;
Weiner 2010; Weiner and BarYosef 1990; Weiner and Goldberg
1990; Weiner, Goldberg, and BarYosef 1993; Weiner et al. 1995,
1998; Xu et al. 2015

Canti 2003; Courty, Goldberg, and
Macphail 1989; Goldberg and
Macphail 2003; Meignen et al.
2001; Mentzer, Romano, and
Voyatzis 2015; Wattez 1988

Key references

S181

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

c

b

a

FTIR p Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.
XRD p X-ray diffraction.
SEM/EDS p scanning electron microscopy/energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy.

Identiﬁcation of calcite sourced from
wood ashes and its degree of
recrystallization in an alkaline
environment

Measurements of stable isotopes
of carbon and oxygen:
• Loose sediment samples
• Quasi in situ measurements
on powders drilled from
micromorphological blocks
No.

Yes. Charring reduces the relative
abundance of long-chain n-alkenes.

Yes. Heated sediments have higher
magnetic susceptibility than unheated
sediments. Iron-bearing minerals in
heated rocks record the intensity and
direction of the magnetic ﬁeld at the
time of burning.

Enrichment in ferromagnetic minerals
are visible as magnetic anomalies.
Magnetic susceptibility is a measure
of the abundance of magnetized grains
within sediment. Measurements of
remnant magnetism can indicate
whether rocks were heated in the past

Identiﬁcation of alkanes from plants
and fatty acids from burned animal
tissues

Yes. Heated materials have a measurable
luminescence signal.

Yes. Heated bones have characteristic
ESR spectra.

Measurement of the g-value of charred
organic component of bone
Measurement of the amount of radiation
damage sustained by a material
following a heating event

Yes. Charred plant tissues have
reﬂectance values that are different
from those of humiﬁed tissues.

Used to identify presence/
absence of heating?

Identiﬁcation of microscopic fragments
of plants based on morphology,
reﬂectance measurements of tissues
and gels, and quantitative ﬂuorescence

Type of information/data

Organic chemistry:
• Gas chromatography mass
spectrometry on sediment
containing organic material

Luminescence measurements:
• Thermoluminescence on heated
ﬂints or sediment
• Optically stimulated luminescence
on heated sediment
Magnetic measurements:
• Magnetic ﬁeld survey on
buried features (magnetometry)
• Magnetic susceptibility on loose
sediment samples
• Palaeomagnetism on heated rocks

Organic petrology:
• In situ measurements on polished,
resin-indurated block sediment
samples (from micromorphological
samples)
• Other materials (e.g., bones)
mounted in epoxy and polished
Electron spin resonance:
• Measurements on heated bones

Analytical technique, sample type

Table 1 (Continued )

Can indicate low- or high-temperature
burning in well-preserved samples.

May be useful for identifying residues
from cooking or animal processing
and conditions of heating. Applications
are thus far limited to Holocene
contexts.

Magnetic susceptibility measurements
can be complicated by soil forming
processes with equiﬁnality producing
ambiguous results in some cases.
Components of magnetization
can be used to determine heating
temperatures. Paleomagnetic
measurements can be used to
determine whether burned rocks
are in situ.

Can be used to study heat treatment
of lithic materials. Both techniques
provide ages for burning events.

Can be used to reconstruct heating
temperature.

Provides information about fuels and
their state of decomposition before
burning.

Other information

Mentzer and Quade 2013; ShahackGross and Ayalon 2013; ShahackGross et al. 2008

Almendros, Martin, and GonzalezVila 1988; Buonasera 2005;
Buonasera et al. 2015;
Eckmeier and Wiesenberg 2009;
Mallol et al. 2013; March 2013;
March, Ferreri, and Guez 1993;
Sistiaga et al. 2011

Barbetti 1986; Bellomo 1993;
Dalan and Banerjee 1998;
Gose 2000

Brodard et al. 2012; Mercier et al.
2007; Richter 2007

Michel, Falguères, and Dolo 1998;
Schurr and Hayes 2008

Clark and Ligouis 2010;
Goldberg et al. 2009;
Stahlschmidt et al. 2015; Suá rezRuiz 2012

Key references

S182

Current Anthropology

Combining ﬁeld observations with the results of the microcontextual study, the authors could convincingly argue that the
feature probably represented a large-scale hearth that was repeatedly used and around which various activities were conducted. Taken together, the studies by Karkanas et al. (2007)
and Shahack-Gross et al. (2014) suggest that ﬁre was repeatedly
used by humans at Qesem. Furthermore, the authors could also
show that the way in which the occupants engaged with ﬁre
changed over time. Although different techniques such as micromorphology, FTIR, and isotopic analysis could reveal the
presence of heat-altered remains at Qesem, it was the integration of these data within a microcontextual research framework
that allowed the authors to make clear behavioral inferences
regarding hominin interactions with ﬁre in the past (Barkai
et al. 2017).
Negative Results from Schöningen and Zhoukoudian
Other microcontextual studies have shown that some Paleolithic sites that were reported and widely cited as containing
evidence for ﬁre in fact do not. One such case is Schöningen
(Lower Saxony, Germany), an open-air Lower Paleolithic site
dating to ca. 300 kya that is renowned for its excellent organic
preservation, including wooden hunting implements. Thieme
(1997, 1999) presented several lines of evidence for anthropogenic ﬁre at Schöningen, including four purportedly burned
wooden implements as well as several features that he called
Feuerstellen, or hearths. These features consisted of localized
reddened areas of calcareous marl that were on average 1 m2 in
size. Excavators noted that there were no obvious remains of
charcoal or ash. In a preliminary micromorphological study of
the features, Schiegl and Thieme (2007) suggested that the
evidence for ﬁre alteration of the substrate was ambiguous
based on the presence of mollusk shells that had not been heat
altered.
Expanding on the initial study of the features by Schiegl and
Thieme, Stahlschmidt et al. (2015) conducted a more detailed
microcontextual analysis employing micromorphology, FTIR
and m-FTIR, organic petrology, mineral magnetic parameters,
and thermoluminescence. Their analysis of the reddened areas
showed that these features consisted of a thick, consolidated
crust of iron oxide that impregnated the calcareous lake deposits
of the substrate. In thin section, the reddening observed in the
ﬁeld appeared to correlate with sediment containing staining
and matrix impregnations of hematite, which result from natural redox processes (Lindbo, Stolt, and Vepraskas 2010). In
direct association with the hematite were calcareous lake sediment and calcareous fragments of mollusk shells, which suggest that the substrate could not have been heated above 5007C.
Similarly, the presence of kaolinite within the feature, which
was identiﬁed using FTIR analysis, suggested that the substrate
had never been heated above 4007C. A study of experimentally
heated sediment collected from Schöningen suggested that the
degree of reddening observed in the features would occur only
at higher temperatures. Additionally, the thermoluminescence

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

study showed that the lithological character of the sediment
within the features did not differ signiﬁcantly from those from
outside of the features. Finally, none of the mineral magnetic
parameters recorded from the sediment samples from the features corresponded with parameters measured from control
samples of the calcareous lake deposits that were experimentally heated. The results of this study strongly suggested that the
reddened features formed as a result of natural oxidation of the
iron sulﬁde (pyrite) and organic material in the lake deposits.
This process was probably induced by the artiﬁcial lowering of
the water table at Schöningen during mining operations in the
late twentieth century.
The Schöningen microcontextual study did yield some evidence for ﬁre at the site, but the authors argue that it was
probably not related to human behavior. Sand-size fragments
of charcoal are present within the features. However, organic
petrographic analysis of these fragments showed that the charcoal was not derived from wood but rather was composed of
rounded fragments of peat. The authors argued that these
fragments came from natural peat ﬁres and were subsequently
redeposited in the lake.
Similarly, the site of Zhoukoudian, Locality 1 (China), has
long been cited as representing early evidence for ﬁre since its
initial excavations in the 1920s and 1930s: the presence of burned
bones and reddish layers were reported from both Layers 10
and 4 and were interpreted as hearths (Black 1931; Jia-Chia
1980; Jia and Huang 1990; Teilhard 1934; Wu and Lin 1983).
Micromorphology and FTIR analysis of the sediments and features in both layers (Goldberg et al. 2001; Weiner et al. 1998)
suggested that they were not related to heating. Layer 10 consists of ﬁnely laminated silt and clay interbedded with yellow
and reddish brown organic fragments with localized fragments
of limestone; charcoal was not observed in the ﬁeld. The ﬁnely
laminated nature of the Layer 10 deposits is consistent with low
energy water or ponded deposition by the Zhoukoudian River,
which at that time entered the cave. In the ﬁeld, channeling and
erosion of Layer 10 is clearly visible. Additionally, the deposits
of Layer 10 completely lack the red-black-white structure of
a combustion feature or hearth (Goldberg et al. 2001; ﬁg. 2).
Micromorphological analysis also demonstrated that the reddening of Layer 4 is a result of diagenesis evidenced by the presence of ﬁne, silt-size grains of hematite. These grains probably
formed during a period of subaerial exposure after the roof of
the site had collapsed. Moreover, FTIR and elemental analyses
revealed no evidence of heat alteration of the limestone (Weiner et al. 1998). However, new data from recent excavations
presented by Gao et al. (2017) may reveal the presence of indisputable ﬁreplaces.
Ambiguous Results from Wonderwerk
Whereas the microcontextual studies at Zhoukoudian and
Schöningen clearly demonstrated absence of evidence for anthropogenic ﬁre and the study at Qesem produced clear evidence for repeated use of ﬁre, other microcontextual studies

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

have produced results that are more difﬁcult to interpret. At
Wonderwerk Cave (Northern Cape, South Africa), Berna et al.
(2012) presented several lines of evidence for heated materials
from a single layer dated to ca. 1.0 Ma. The study integrated
micromorphology with m-FTIR, FTIR analysis of excavated
bone fragments, and lithic analysis. The authors report potlidded lithics, which they interpret as having fractured as a result of heating, probably above 5007C. In addition, they noted
that bones recovered during excavation exhibit colors that are
consistent with bones that have been exposed to heat (Stiner
et al. 1995). FTIR analysis of several of these bones demonstrated that they were heated to above 4007C, and additionally
some altered clay adhering to a gray-colored bone suggested
heating of the clay to somewhere between 4007C and 7007C.
FTIR spectra collected on white bone fragments did not contain peaks that would indicate the high temperatures that are
typically associated with calcination (Thompson, Islam, and
Bonniere 2013). In micromorphological samples, Berna and colleagues (2012) identiﬁed pseudomorphic grains of oxalate crystals composed of calcite, which the authors identiﬁed as ashes
following (Canti 2003; Wattez 1988); however, Berna et al.
(2012) and Goldberg, Berna, and Chazan (2015) note that calciﬁed plant remains in the form of rhizoliths and other plant
fragments are also present in the same deposits, suggesting that
the formation history of these layers may be complex. Additionally, m-FTIR analysis conducted directly on the thin sections identiﬁed bone that was also heated to between 4007C
and 5507C.
The authors employed microcontextual analyses to identify
the presence of heated materials at Wonderwerk Cave. To address the association of this evidence with hominin behavior,
they considered both microscopic and site-scale formation processes of the deposits in question. The authors ﬁrst addressed
whether the burning could have occurred independently of
human activity. They argued that because the burned materials
are distributed throughout a thick archaeological stratum, it is
unlikely that wildﬁres could have repeatedly extended deep into
the cave from the surrounding landscape. Second, they noted
that whereas none of the burned materials were recovered in
primary position, the angularity of the bone and ash fragments
observed in thin section rules out the possibility that these
materials were transported into the cave by natural processes.
Berna et al. (2012) point out that without a clear combustion
feature, it is difﬁcult to demonstrate hominin control of ﬁre
(Roebroeks and Villa 2011). However, they argue that there is a
clear association of human activity and ﬁre at Wonderwerk,
implying human knowledge, if not use, of ﬁre in the cave.
Difﬁcult Cases: The Levantine Middle Paleolithic
In the three types of scenarios described above, microcontextual studies have contributed to answering the three questions
about burned materials that were raised at the beginning of this
paper. We feel that in addition to linking humans to burned
materials, the microcontextual approach is instrumental in cases

S183

where less-than-ideal preservation conditions at Paleolithic sites
have greatly altered the evidence for human use of ﬁre. Indeed,
many of the analytical techniques that we champion in earlier
sections of this paper were developed for the study of combustion features affected by chemical diagenesis and physical
reworking or a combination thereof at the Levantine Middle
Paleolithic sites of Kebara, Hayonim, and Amud (Berna and
Goldberg 2008; Schiegl et al. 1994; Weiner, Goldberg, and BarYosef 2002; Weiner et al. 1995, 2007). In each of these sites,
research teams expanded on an initial desire to document the
presence of burned materials in primary or secondary position,
ﬁrst integrating micromorphological studies with mineralogy
and chemical analyses and later microsampling the intact features
for other types of microscopic artifacts, such as phytoliths. In this
way, these sites served as laboratories for the development of
analytical techniques that, thanks to recent improvements in
instrumentation, can now be directly applied to micromorphological samples (see table 1).
At the sites of Kebara and Hayonim, evidence for ﬁre seems
readily apparent in the ﬁeld (Meignen, Goldberg, and BarYosef 2007; Meignen et al. 2001), where the most obvious expression is structured combustion features consisting of a sometimes rubiﬁed basal substrate overlain by a charcoal-rich zone,
which is capped by calcareous or diagenetically altered ashes
consisting of apatite (dahllite) and other phosphate minerals
(Meignen et al. 2001) In proﬁle, these features vary from
centimeter- to decimeter-diameter lenses (e.g., Hayonim Cave)
to thin, centimeter-thick stringers within depressions. In plan
view the features are generally circular (Berna and Goldberg
2008; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Meignen, Goldberg, and
Bar-Yosef 2007), although at Amud Cave, only the cemented
ashy portions of the tripartite sequence of combustion features
seem to have survived, the rest of the sediments having been
homogenized by bioturbation (Berna and Goldberg 2008; Madella et al. 2002). At Kebara and Hayonim, similar vertical sequences of basal rubiﬁcation, burned organic matter or charcoal,
and ashes can be seen in thin section, which also reveals repeated
stacking of combusted layers that are not evident in the ﬁeld.
In the ﬁeld, many of the features were identiﬁed as obvious
combustion residues. Other features reveal an important caveat in trying to evaluate the former presence of ﬁre because of
diagenesis: the physical and chemical changes following deposition. In Kebara and Hayonim, some of the original components, especially calcareous ashes, dissolved or were transformed into other minerals, such as phosphates (Berna and
Goldberg 2008; Schiegl et al. 1994, 1996; Weiner, Schiegl, and
Bar-Yosef 1995; Weiner et al. 1995, 2007). Although these
changes can be readily observed in the ﬁeld where the original
combustion structures still exist (e.g., Kebara Cave; Meignen,
Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 2007), other components, such as
bone, have been completely dissolved (Goldberg et al. 2007;
Schiegl et al. 1994; Weiner, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 1993, 2002;
Weiner et al. 1995). Based on the typical sequence of rubiﬁed
sediment overlain by charcoal and ashes that was documented
in better-preserved areas of the sites (Meignen et al. 2001),

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S184

Current Anthropology

similar features containing phosphate minerals and amorphous
silicates instead of ashes were interpreted as hearths affected by
diagenesis.
In addition to micromorphology, a number of other techniques were employed to conﬁrm the presence of anthropogenic ﬁre within the sites. In Kebara Cave, researchers documented not only the presence of numerous hearth structures
but also the occurrence of wood phytoliths, which would not
have accumulated within the cave naturally (Albert, Berna, and
Goldberg 2012; Albert et al. 2000). Furthermore, wood phytoliths also occur in cave sediments that do not contain hearth
structures that are visible in the ﬁeld; these types of phytoliths
are absent from control samples of terra rossa collected outside
the site. In Amud Cave, phytoliths from calcareous ashes and
surrounding sediments were studied using micromorphology
and stable isotope analysis. The phytoliths were predominantly
from wood (including palm and ﬁg), whereas grass phytoliths,
which are fresh and composed of spikelets, were thought to
have been brought into the cave and accumulated within the
anthropogenic ashy units (Madella et al. 2002). Thus, the ubiquitous presence of wood phytoliths in ashes suggested that these
siliceous materials could be an indication of ﬁreplaces in cases
when the more soluble calcitic component might have been
dissolved.
One of the most important things to come out of the Levantine cave studies was an improved understanding of the
microscopic expression of burned materials in different depositional contexts. The fabric and structure of burned materials, which are visible in thin section, can help one determine
whether the burned materials (1) are in their original place;
(2) have been reworked locally by natural processes such as
bioturbation (Berna and Goldberg 2008; Goldberg and BarYosef 1998; Madella et al. 2002), colluviation, or runoff (Goldberg et al. 2007); or (3) have been reworked by human activities,
such as dumping or hearth rake out (Goldberg 2003; Kuhn et al.
2009; Meignen, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 2007; Miller 2015;
Schiegl et al. 2003). At the site of Kebara, a large concentration of ashes in the rear of the cave was interpreted as a midden
only after micromorphological analyses ruled out other agents
of redeposition. Such evidence for intentional collection and
movement of burned materials within the living environment
not only provides an indirect marker of human intentionality
in the control and maintenance of ﬁre but also shows that this
behavior was repeated over long periods of time.
Many of the techniques that, when combined, form the basis
of a microcontextual analysis of a combustion feature, were
developed during the decades-long excavations at these sites.
In Kebara and Hayonim Caves, mineralogical analyses were
classically carried out using FTIR in the ﬁeld on bulk sediment
samples that were ground and made into a pellet using KBr as a
binder; supplemental conﬁrmations followed in the laboratory
using X-ray diffraction (XRD; e.g., Weiner, Goldberg, and BarYosef 1993; Weiner et al. 1995, 1998). Within the past decade,
however, it became clear that certain contextual evidence was
lost using bulk samples, even if they were collected as !1 g

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

samples in the ﬁeld: it was not readily apparent what was really being measured. For example, apatite in a sediment sample
could be sand- or silt-size fragments of bone or a secondary
precipitate. Thus, in order to have an idea of what is actually
being analyzed in the sample, researchers have developed new
microanalytical techniques such as m-FTIR and micro-XRD
(m-XRD; Berna, forthcoming; Berthold and Mentzer, forthcoming). Although these techniques were not available at the
time, similar microcontextual analyses were conducted directly on thin sections from Kebara and Hayonim using SEM/
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDS; Schiegl et al.
1996). Kebara Cave was also the site of one of the ﬁrst studies to integrate phytolith analyses from loose samples with
micromorphology of combustion features (Albert, Berna, and
Goldberg 2012), an approach that was recently extended to
include phytolith identiﬁcations in thin section (Wadley et al.
2011).
Despite these methodological advances, true microcontextual studies from the Levantine “laboratory” sites are limited. However, a test case for the microcontextual approach
was developed for the site of Kebara and presented by Berna
and Goldberg (2008). They analyzed a large, well-structured
hearth containing an organic-rich layer with bones overlain
by ashes with both micromorphology and m-FTIR, which
provided temperature estimates of the different components:
(a) combusted plant fuel, heated at ~3007C, and the included
burned bones heated at ~3007C; (b) the overlying !1 mm thick
accumulation of phosphatized calcitic ashes with (c) inclusions
of calcined bone heated at ≥5507C, and (d) burned soil particles
heated at ≥5007C. These results yield evidence of heating of
various components within the different parts of the hearth
structure and also provide additional FTIR data to corroborate
previous studies of the diagenesis of the features (e.g., Schiegl
et al. 1996; Weiner et al. 2007). This work demonstrates how
such an approach yields a more holistic picture of the conditions of formation and preservation of hearths.

Approaches to Recognizing Heated
Archaeological Materials
Steps toward positive recognition of ﬁre in the Paleolithic archaeological record take place in both the ﬁeld and in the laboratory. The ﬁeld is the ﬁrst place where the context of possible
burned material can be established, including the mutual associations among objects and features as well as their connection to the deposits that contain them.
In the ﬁeld, one can note possible indicators of in situ ﬁre,
including rubiﬁcation of sediments, the presence of ashy sediment, charcoal and char, and other burned objects, such as ﬁrecracked rock and burned or calcined bone. In younger sites
intact, structured features, such as pits (including stone-lined or
plastered pits; e.g., Thoms 2008, 2009) can be primary combustion features. Mounded accumulations and middens can
also be loci of reworked combusted materials, like those ob-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

served at sites such as Kebara and Üçağızlı (e.g., Goldberg 2003;
Kuhn et al. 2009; Meignen, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 2007).
Fieldwork aimed at recovering data about ﬁre should be
focused on observing the setting of the site and its lithostratigraphy. For example, noting the shape, size, nature, and context of suspected burned zones may be helpful for deciding
whether a reddened zone is the result of heating or diagenesis
(Cushing et al. 1986; Pigati et al. 2014).
In addition, objects and features should be recorded precisely
in the ﬁeld using, for example, a theodolite system (Dibble and
McPherron 1988; McPherron and Dibble 2002; McPherron,
Dibble, and Goldberg 2005). This or a similar type of strategy
provides both accurate 3-D data on objects, features, and samples and also virtual real-time data in the ﬁeld to assess the integrity of deposits, as well as the location and context of samples collected for further analysis in the laboratory.
Laboratory analyses are needed to supply qualitative and
quantitative data that, when combined with ﬁeld observations,
can document—or at least suggest—the former presence of
ﬁre. The materials Paleolithic archaeologists often cite as evidence for past ﬁre include ashes, charcoal, burned bone, heated
(often reddened) substrates, and ﬁre-altered rocks; most of
these materials are initially identiﬁed in the ﬁeld. For example,
a deposit that appears grayish and silty is described as ashy,
black ﬂecks encountered during excavation are called charcoal,
black and white bones are termed charred and calcined, and
reddened patches of sediment are ﬁre-altered substrate. Although these types of observations provide the ﬁrst line of
evidence for the possible presence of ﬁre at an archaeological site, on their own, ﬁeld observations are not sufﬁcient to
demonstrate heating, let alone human use of ﬁre. This is because interpreting these ﬁeld observations is confounded by
equiﬁnality: the characteristics that we most often use to identify potential ﬁre evidence in the ﬁeld are not solely produced
by ﬁre. For example, most ﬁeld identiﬁcations of burned materials—following guidelines that we advocate (e.g., Meignen
et al. 2001)—are based on color: charcoal is black, burned bone
is black or white, ash is gray, and heated substrates are red.
However, color is not always a useful indicator for evidence of
heating. Bone that has been subjected to heating can undergo
color changes (Shipman, Foster, and Schoeninger 1984; Stiner
et al. 2001), but similar color changes, particularly blackening,
can be mimicked by mineral staining (Shahack-Gross, BarYosef, and Weiner 1997). Additionally, black-colored organic
material may be carbonized; however, humiﬁed organic material can also appear black (e.g., Stahlschmidt et al. 2015; Taylor et al. 1998). Similarly, reddened patches of sediment can be
caused by heating, but they can also form through natural processes of oxidation (Canti and Linford 2000; Stahlschmidt et al.
2015). Therefore, any ﬁeld identiﬁcation of potential evidence
for ﬁre must be followed up by laboratory analyses that can
either conﬁrm or refute the ﬁeld observations. Over the past
several decades, numerous laboratory techniques and methods
have been developed and applied to suspected burned materials
from archaeological sites. These techniques, the type of infor-

S185

mation they provide, and the capacities in which they can be
informative about past use of ﬁre are summarized in table 1.
Despite the plethora of techniques that can be successfully
employed in the identiﬁcation of materials subjected to heat
in the past, none of the techniques on their own can clearly
demonstrate that the source of this heat was directly related
to human behavior. Barbetti (1986) suggested that the macroscopic association of burned areas with concentrations of
unambiguously cultural material may provide strong but not
necessarily conclusive evidence for anthropogenic heating. However, as in the Peru example from the beginning of this paper
(ﬁg. 1), natural ﬁres can mimic anthropogenic ones, so that
the simple association of demonstrably burned materials with
cultural artifacts can be ambiguous at best and misleading at
worst. Since 1986, archaeological scientists have heeded Barbetti’s call for the application of new techniques for identifying
heated remains in the archaeological record, but the problem of
demonstrating human agency in the thermal alteration of archaeological materials remains. More attention must be paid to
the deposit or deposits in which burned materials are found.
We believe that the application of geoarchaeological methods is necessary to establish clear links between human behavior and ﬁre in the Paleolithic archaeological record. As geoarchaeologists working at the microscopic scale, we argue here
for a research strategy that moves beyond simply associating
cultural artifacts with burned remains in the ﬁeld. Rather, we
advocate for the use of high-resolution approaches to the study
of burned materials in Paleolithic archaeological sites. These
approaches can be broadly grouped under the category of “microarchaeology” (sensu Weiner 2010). But more importantly,
we stress the integration of different types of analyses and contextualization of burned materials within macroscopic and microscopic deposits.

Summary and Concluding Comments
As seen in the preceding case studies, determining whether one
has evidence for human use of ﬁre at a Paleolithic site is more
complicated than simply establishing whether burned remains
are associated with cultural artifacts. First, one must determine
that what is suspected to be burned—whether charcoal, ash,
burned bone, or heat-altered stone and substrate—is in fact
burned. Multiple studies including those at Schöningen (Stahlschmidt et al. 2015) and Zhoukoudian (Goldberg et al. 2001;
Weiner et al. 1998) have repeatedly shown that simple ﬁeld
identiﬁcations of heated remains are not reliable; laboratory
tests are necessary for ﬁrmly establishing whether an object
has been subjected to heat in the past. Thankfully, numerous
techniques have been developed over the past several decades
for examining how archaeological materials have been transformed through heating.
On the other hand, when these techniques are used alone,
they cannot demonstrate that the agent of heating was human
rather than natural (see also Aldeias 2017). One must establish
whether the burned materials are located where originally

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S186

Current Anthropology

burned or whether they have been redeposited or transported
since combustion. Determining the depositional history of
burned materials—along with any other type of material contained within an archaeological site—requires that one conduct a geoarchaeological study that develops a holistic site
formation model. A geoarchaeological perspective is necessary
because context is more than the association of certain types
of materials within a speciﬁc layer or site. Rather, context is the
entire history of how these objects came to be associated with
one another. By establishing the depositional history of burned
remains and cultural materials, we can more readily assess the
role that humans played in the formation of burned archaeological remains.
To illustrate this point, we can look at two examples from the
case studies above. At Schöningen, Stahlschmidt et al. (2015)
reported the occurrence of small fragments of charcoal within
layers containing cultural remains, namely, wooden spears and
butchered bones. If we assume that context is simply a matter
of association, then one could conclude that the fragments of
charcoal were produced by humans. However, when they applied a microcontextual approach, Stahlschmidt et al. (2015)
demonstrated that the fragments of charcoal were likely produced elsewhere as a result of peat ﬁres and were subsequently
transported from their original place of combustion and redeposited within the lake sediments. These results strongly
suggest that the charcoal fragments were formed by natural
ﬁres despite their association with cultural remains. In contrast,
at Qesem Cave, Karkanas et al. (2007) and Shahack-Gross
et al. (2014) were able to demonstrate that various types of
remains—such as ashes, burned bone, and heated soil aggregates—were associated with one another within single lenses.
By establishing the association of these burned materials within
individual depositional contexts and by investigating the formation processes of the cave, the authors could convincingly
argue that such depositional contexts were not natural and
were therefore probably anthropogenic.
Recent studies, particularly those conducted at Qesem (Karkanas et al. 2007; Shahack-Gross et al. 2014) show how a microcontextual approach can provide insights into ﬁre-related
behavior not readily gained from other types of studies. At
Qesem, the researchers presented clear evidence for repeated,
habitual use of ﬁre throughout the sequence and for repeated
control of ﬁre in the form of a multiphase hearth. These types
of observations go a long way in directly testing evolutionary
models of hominin interaction with ﬁre. However, they are
possible only through a microscopic approach that emphasizes
integration and contextualization of multiple analytical techniques.
Despite the promise that the microcontextual approach has
shown, we should not see it as a panacea for making the identiﬁcation and interpretation of ﬁre use in the Paleolithic easy
or simple. In fact, applications of the microcontextual approach
to sites with potential evidence for early use of ﬁre have shown
how complicated the issue can be. As seen in several of the case
studies presented above, the results—even when placed within

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

a microcontextual framework—can be either difﬁcult to interpret or ambiguous. For sites like Kebara and Hayonim, the
researchers were able to demonstrate that the repeated burning
of hearths produced the sedimentary sequence seen at these
sites. However, because the calcareous ashes that originally composed these hearths were susceptible to diagenesis, the researchers
needed to study the chemical environment of the cave and how
this inﬂuenced the preservation of ashes. A microcontextual
approach here was essential for understanding the complex
interplay of depositional and postdepositional processes and
for establishing repeated use and control of ﬁre by Neanderthals in these sites.
The researchers at Wonderwerk (Berna et al. 2012) could
demonstrate at a microscopic scale that burned remains were
found in association with cultural artifacts. And while they
could argue that the burned materials are probably anthropogenic, they were circumspect in their interpretation of the
results: an association of burned remains and artifacts may
suggest knowledge and possible use of ﬁre, but it does not
necessarily imply control or production.
We can now revisit the ambiguous case from the Peruvian
Andes presented at the beginning of the paper. We believe we
were rightly concerned that if the remains of the bushﬁres
entered into the archaeological record, it may be difﬁcult—if
not impossible—to determine whether they were natural or
cultural. Certainly, ﬁeld observations would establish that circular patches of charcoal and ash were associated with cultural
remains. Even the location of one of the patches—within the
center of the structure—would imply, based solely on association, that it was likely cultural and may even represent a central, domestic hearth. We suggested that given the possibility of
stylistically dating the architecture of the house and radiometrically dating the charcoal from the “hearth” one could
potentially establish a chronological association of the feature
with the architecture. This scenario could still prove problematic if there is an old-wood effect, or if the house had been
used for a long period of time. Even these concerns would
be moot in a similar situation from a Paleolithic site, where
stylistic dating of artifacts covers broad time periods and radiometric dating has large standard errors or is not directly
applicable.
However, a microcontextual analysis that would examine
the depositional context of the burned remains may help resolve the issue. For example, a micromorphological study may
provide evidence for an occupational hiatus between the last
use of the structure (such as a ﬂoor or concentrated occupational debris) and the burned feature. This evidence could be a
thin layer formed from the collapse of the roof of the structure
or could include a thin layer of windblown sand, which would
only accumulate once the building had been abandoned. Similarly, a micromorphological study may identify increased biological activity directly below the burned feature or even formation of a soil, which would imply stasis in accumulation and
probably abandonment of the structure. Although all of these
scenarios are hypothetical, they illustrate how an interpreta-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

tion of human interaction with ﬁre requires a thorough and
detailed understanding of the formation history of an entire
site that can only be obtained at the microscopic scale.
Researchers have successfully applied the microcontextual
approach to critical sites that are, or have been, often quoted
to document the presence of ﬁre in early human history, including Zhoukoudian and Schöningen. Microcontextual analyses have also provided suggestive evidence of ﬁre at sites that
were not readily thought to have them at ﬁrst glance (e.g.,
Wonderwerk). In this light, it is clear that such multimethod
approaches need to be expanded to other sites, particularly
early ones when circumstances permit, that have been thought
to have evidence of early use of ﬁre (e.g., Swartkrans, Beeches
Pit, Chesowanja, Olorgesailie) or other, yet-to-be-discovered
sites.
Attempts to study hominin interactions with ﬁre in the past
necessarily depend on the context of the objects, features, deposits, and the site in its landscape (see examples in Aldeias
2017; James 1989; Sandgathe 2017). So much of the older
literature and excavations—and sadly, many current ones as
well—fail to document or appreciate deposits, stratigraphy,
geoarchaeology, and site formation, so we have a rather eclectic
and fuzzy view of ﬁre from ancient and even more recent
prehistoric sites. The message for the future seems clear: we
have to make a concerted effort to closely examine the context
of archaeological deposits at all scales using microcontextual
approaches (e.g., micromorphology, m-FTIR, micro-XRF, m-XRD).
Without such an approach, we can hope to achieve only incomplete results and answers.

Acknowledgments
A. Sistiaga Gutiérrez is gratefully acknowledged for a primer in
organic matter, and comments from V. Aldeias and D. Sandgathe helped to clarify some of the text in its early stages.
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant MI 1748/1-1 funded
analyses presented in ﬁgure 2. K. Rademaker facilitated our
fortuitous discovery in the Andes.

References Cited
Albert, R. M., Francesco Berna, and Paul Goldberg. 2012. Insights on Neanderthal ﬁre use at Kebara Cave (Israel) through high resolution study of
prehistoric combustion features: evidence from phytoliths and thin sections.
Quaternary International 247:278–293.
Albert, R. M., and D. Cabanes. 2007. Fire in prehistory: an experimental
approach to combustion processes and phytolith remains. Israel Journal of
Earth Sciences 56:175–189.
Albert, R. M., O. Lavi, L. Estroff, S. Weiner, A. Tsatskin, A. Ronen, and S. LevYadun. 1999. Mode of occupation of Tabun Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel during
the Mousterian period: a study of the sediments and phytoliths. Journal of
Archaeological Science 26:1249–1260.
Albert, R. M., S. Weiner, O. Bar-Yosef, and L. Meignen. 2000. Phytoliths in
the Middle Palaeolithic deposits of Kebara Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: study of
the plant materials used for fuel and other purposes. Journal of Archaeological Science 27:931–947.
Aldeias, Vera. 2017. Experimental approaches to archaeological ﬁre features
and their behavioral relevance. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S191–
S205.

S187
Almendros, G., F. Martin, and F. J. Gonzalez-Vila. 1988. Effects of ﬁre on
humic and lipid fractions in a Dystric Xerochrept in Spain. Geoderma 42:
115–127.
Barbetti, M. 1986. Traces of ﬁre in the archaeological record, before one
million years ago. Journal of Human Evolution 8:771–781.
Barkai, Ran, Avi Gopher, S. Lauritzen, and A. Frumkin. 2003. Uranium series
dates from Qesem Cave, Israel, and the end of the Lower Palaeolithic. Nature
423:977–979.
Barkai, Ran, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, and Avi Gopher. 2017. Fire for a reason:
barbecue at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel. Current Anthropology 58
(suppl. 16):S314–S328.
Bellomo, R. 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological
evidence of ﬁre resulting from human activities. Journal of Archaeological
Science 20:525–554.
Berna, Francesco. Forthcoming. Micro-FTIR. In Encyclopedia of archaeological
soil and sediment micromorphology. G. Stoops and C. Nicosia, eds. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Berna, Francesco, A. Behar, R. Shahack-Gross, J. Berg, J. Zorn, E. Boaretto,
A. Gilboa, et al. 2007. Sediments exposed to high temperatures: reconstructing pyrotechnological processes in Late Bronze and Iron Age strata at Tel Dor
(Israel). Journal of Archaeological Science 34:358–373.
Berna, Francesco, and Paul Goldberg. 2008. Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and associated hominin behavior in Israel. Israel Journal of
Earth Sciences 56:107–121.
Berna, Francesco, Paul Goldberg, L. K. Horwitz, J. Brink, S. Holt, M. Bamford,
and Michael Chazan. 2012. Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ ﬁre in the
Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape Province, South
Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 109:7593–
7594.
Berthold, C., and Susan M. Mentzer. Forthcoming. Micro X-ray diffraction. In
Encyclopedia of archaeological soil and sediment micromorphology. G. Stoops
and C. Nicosia, eds. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Black, D. 1931. Evidence of the use of ﬁre by Sinanthropus. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of China 11:107–108.
Boivin, N. 2004. Landscape and cosmology in the South Indian Neolithic: new
perspectives on the Deccan ashmounds. Cambridge Archaeological Journal
14:235–257.
Bordes, F. 1957. Review of K. P. Oakley “Fire as a Paleolithic tool and weapon.”
L’Anthropologie 61:314–317.
Brodard, A., P. Guibert, F. Lévêque, V. Mathé, L. Carozza, and A. Burens.
2012. Thermal characterization of ancient hearths from the cave of Les
Fraux (Dordogne, France) by thermoluminescence and magnetic susceptibility measurements. Quaternary Geochronology 10:353–358.
Bullock, P., N. Fedoroff, A. Jongerius, G. Stoops, T. Tursina, and U. Babel.
1985. Handbook for soil thin section description. Wolverhampton: Waine
Research.
Buonasera, T. 2005. Fatty acid analysis of prehistoric burned rocks: a case
study from central California. Journal of Archaeological Science 32:957–965.
Buonasera, T. Y., A. H. Tremayne, C. M. Darwent, J. W. Eerkens, and O. K.
Mason. 2015. Lipid biomarkers and compound speciﬁc d13C analysis indicate early development of a dual-economic system for the Arctic Small Tool
tradition in northern Alaska. Journal of Archaeological Science 61:129–138.
Cabanes, D., Carolina Mallol, I. Exposito, and J. Baena. 2010. Phytolith evidence for hearths and beds in the late Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu
cave (Cantabria, Spain). Journal of Archaeological Science 37:2947–2957.
Canti, M., and N. Linford. 2000. The effects of ﬁre on archaeological soils and
sediments: temperature and colour relationships. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 66:385–395.
Canti, M. G. 2003. Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of
plant ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena 54:339–361.
Clark, J. L., and B. Ligouis. 2010. Burned bone in the Howieson’s Poort and
post-Howieson’s Poort Middle Stone Age deposits at Sibudu (South Africa):
behavioral and taphonomic implications. Journal of Archaeological Science
37:2650–2661.
Courty, M.-A., Paul Goldberg, and R. I. Macphail. 1989. Soils and micromorphology in archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cushing, J., A. M. Wenner, E. Noble, and M. Daily. 1986. A groundwater
hypothesis for the origin of “ﬁre areas” on the northern Channel Islands,
California. Quaternary Research 26:207–217.
Dalan, R. A., and S. K. Banerjee. 1998. Solving archaeological problems using
techniques of soil magnetism. Geoarchaeology 13:3–36.
Dibble, Harold L., and Shannon P. McPherron. 1988. On the computerization
of archaeological projects. Journal of Field Archaeology 15:431–440.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S188

Current Anthropology

Domanski, M., and J. A. Webb. 1992. Effect of heat treatment on siliceous
rocks used in prehistoric lithic technology. Journal of Archaeological Science
19:601–614.
Eckmeier, E., and G. L. B. Wiesenberg. 2009. Short-chain n-alkanes (C16–20)
in ancient soil are useful molecular markers for prehistoric biomass burning.
Journal of Archaeological Science 36(7):1590–1596.
Elbaum, R., S. Weiner, R. M. Albert, and M. Elbaum. 2003. Detection of burning
of plant materials in the archaeological record by changes in the refractive indices of siliceous phytoliths. Journal of Archaeological Science 30:217–226.
Forget, M. C. L., L. Regev, D. E. Friesem, and R. Shahack-Gross. 2015. Physical
and mineralogical properties of experimentally heated chaff-tempered mud
bricks: implications for reconstruction of environmental factors inﬂuencing
the appearance of mud bricks in archaeological conﬂagration events. Journal
of Archaeological Science: Reports 2:80–93.
Gao, Xing, Shuangquan Zhang, Yue Zhang, and Fuyou Chen. 2017. Evidence of
hominin use and maintenance of ﬁre at Zhoukoudian. Current Anthropology
58(suppl. 16):S267–S277.
Goldberg, Paul. 2003. Some observations on Middle and Upper Palaeolithic
ashy cave and rockshelter deposits in the Near East. In More than meets the
eye: studies on Upper Palaeolithic diversity in the Near East. A. N. GoringMorris and A. Belfer-Cohen, eds. Pp. 19–32. Oxford: Oxbow.
Goldberg, Paul, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1998. Site formation processes in Kebara
and Hayonim Caves and their signiﬁcance in Levantine prehistoric caves.
In Neandertals and modern humans in western Asia. T. Akazawa, K. Aoki,
and O. Bar-Yosef, eds. Pp. 107–125. New York: Plenum.
Goldberg, Paul, and Francesco Berna. 2010. Micromorphology and context.
Quaternary International 214:56–62.
Goldberg, Paul, Francesco Berna, and Michael Chazan. 2015. Deposition and
diagenesis in the Earlier Stone Age of Wonderwerk Cave, Excavation 1,
South Africa. African Archaeological Review 32:613–643.
Goldberg, Paul, H. Laville, L. Meignen, and O. Bar-Yosef. 2007. Stratigraphy
and geoarchaeological history of Kebara Cave, Mount Carmel. In Kebara
Cave, Mt. Carmel, Israel: the Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeology, pt. 1.
O. Bar-Yosef and L. Meignen, eds. Pp. 49–89. American School of Prehistoric
Research Bulletin 49. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology
and Ethnology, Harvard University.
Goldberg, Paul, and R. I. Macphail. 2003. Strategies and techniques in collecting
micromorphology samples. Geoarchaeology 18:571–578.
———. 2006. Practical and theoretical geoarchaeology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Goldberg, Paul, Christopher E. Miller, S. Schiegl, Francesco Berna, B. Ligouis,
N. J. Conard, and L. Wadley. 2009. Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance
in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 1:95–122.
Goldberg, Paul, S. Weiner, O. Bar-Yosef, Q. Xu, and J. Liu. 2001. Site formation processes at Zhoukoudian, China. Journal of Human Evolution 41:
483–530.
Gopher, Avi, Ran Barkai, R. Shimelmitz, M. Khalaily, C. Lemorini, I. Heshkovitz,
and M. Stiner. 2005. Qesem Cave: an Amudian site in Central Israel. Journal
of the Israel Prehistoric Society 35:69–92.
Gose, W. 2000. Paleomagnetic studies of burned rocks. Journal of Archaeological Science 27:409–421.
Gur-Arieh, S., E. Mintz, E. Boaretto, and R. Shahack-Gross. 2013. An ethnoarchaeological study of cooking installations in rural Uzbekistan: development of a new method for identiﬁcation of fuel sources. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:4331–4347.
Harrold, F., and M. Otte. 2001. Time, space, and cultural process in the European Middle-Upper Palaeolithic transition. In Questioning the answers: resolving fundamental problems of the Early Upper Paleolithic. M. A. Hays and
P. T. Thacker, eds. Pp. 3–12. British Archaeological Reports International
Series 1005. Oxford: Archaeopress.
James, S. R. 1989. Hominid use of ﬁre in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene.
Current Anthropology 30:1–26.
Jia, L., and W. Huang. 1990. The story of Peking Man. Beijing: Foreign
Languages Press.
Jia, L. P. 1980. Early man in China. Beijing: Foreign Language Press.
Karkanas, P. 2010. Preservation of anthropogenic materials under different
geochemical processes: a mineralogical approach. Quaternary International
214:63–69.
Karkanas, P., M. Koumouzelis, J. K. Kozlowski, V. Sitlivy, K. Sawbucks, Francesco Berna, and S. Weiner. 2004. The earliest evidence for clay hearths: Aurignacian features in Closure Cave 1, southern Greece. Antiquity 78:513–525.
Karkanas, P., J. P. Rigged, J. F. Semite, R. M. Albert, and S. Weiner. 2002. Ash
bones and guano: a study of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

Grotte XVI, Dordogne, France. Journal of Archaeological Science 29:721–
732.
Karkanas, P., R. Shahack-Gross, A. Ayalon, M. Bar-Matthews, Ran Barkai,
A. Frumkin, Avi Gopher, and M. C. Stiner. 2007. Evidence for habitual use
of ﬁre at the end of the Lower Paleolithic: site-formation processes at Qesem
Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 53:197–212.
Kuhn, S. L., M. C. Stiner, E. Güleç, I. Özer, H. Yilmaz, I. Baykara, A. AçIkkol,
et al. 2009. The early Upper Paleolithic occupations at ÜçagIzlI Cave (Hatay,
Turkey). Journal of Human Evolution 56:87–113.
Lindbo, D. L., M. H. Stolt, and M. J. Vepraskas. 2010. Redoximorphic features.
In Interpretation of micromorphological features of soils and regoliths. G.
Stoops, V. Marcelino, and F. Mees, eds. Pp. 129–147. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lowe, K. M., Susan M. Mentzer, L. A. Wallis, and J. Shulmeister. 2016. A multiproxy study of anthropogenic sedimentation and human occupation of Gledswood Shelter 1: exploring an interior sandstone rockshelter in Northern
Australia. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, doi:10.1007/s12520
-016-0354-8.
Macphail, R. I., and G. M. Cruise. 2001. The soil micromorphologist as team
player: a multianalytical approach to the study of European microstratigraphy. In Earth science and archaeology. Paul Goldberg, V. Holliday, and
R. Ferring, eds. Pp. 241–267. New York: Plenum.
Madella, M., M. K. Jones, Paul Goldberg, Y. Goren, and E. Hovers. 2002. Exploitation of plant resources by Neanderthals in Amud Cave (Israel): the
evidence from phytolith studies. Journal of Archaeological Science 29:703–
719.
Mallol, Carolina, C. M. Hernández, D. Cabanes, A. Sistiaga, J. Machado, Á.
Rodríguez, L. Pérez, and B. Galván. 2013. The black layer of Middle Palaeolithic combustion structures: interpretation and archaeostratigraphic implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:2515–2537.
Mallol, Carolina M., Susan M. Mentzer, and Christopher E. Miller. Forthcoming. Combustion features. In Encyclopedia of archaeological soil and sediment micromorphology. G. Stoops and C. Nicosia, eds. Hoboken, NJ: WileyBlackwell.
March, R. J. 2013. Searching for the functions of ﬁre structures in Eynan
(Mallaha) and their formation processes: a geochemical approach. In Natuﬁan foragers in the Levant. O. Bar-Yosef and F. Valla, eds. Pp. 227–283. Ann
Arbor, MI: International Monographs in Prehistory.
March, R. J., J. C. Ferreri, and C. Guez. 1993. Étude des foyers préhistoriques
des gisements magdaléniens du Bassin Parisien: l’approche expérimentale.
Mémoires du Groupement Archéologique de Seine-et-Marne 1:87–95.
Matthews, W. 2005. Micromorphological and microstratigraphic traces of
uses and concepts of space. In Inhabiting Çatalhöyük: reports from the 1995–
1999 seasons. I. Hodder, ed. Pp. 355–398. BIAA Monograph 40. Ankara:
McDonald Institute Monographs.
Matthews, W., C. A. I. French, T. Lawrence, D. F. Cutler, and M. K. Jones. 1997.
Microstratigraphic traces of site formation processes and human activities.
World Archaeology 29:281–308.
McPherron, Shannon P., and Harold Dibble. 2002. Using computers in archaeology: a practical guide. New York: McGraw Hill.
McPherron, Shannon J. P., Harold L. Dibble, and Paul Goldberg. 2005. Z. Geoarchaeology 20:243–262.
Meignen, L., O. Bar-Yosef, Paul Goldberg, and S. Weiner. 2001. Le feu au
Paléolithique moyen: recherches sur les structures de combustion et le
statut des foyers: l’exemple du Proche-Orient. Paléorient 26:9–22.
Meignen, L., Paul Goldberg, and O. Bar-Yosef. 2007. The hearths at Kebara
Cave and their role in site formation processes. In Kebara Cave, Mt. Carmel,
Israel: the Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeology, pt. 1. O. Bar-Yosef and
L. Meignen, eds. Pp. 91–122. American School of Prehistoric Research
Bulletin 49. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University.
Mentzer, Susan. 2013. Microarchaeological approaches to the identiﬁcation
and interpretation of combustion features in prehistoric archaeological sites.
Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 21:616–668.
Mentzer, Susan M., and J. Quade. 2013. Compositional and isotopic analytical
methods in archaeological micromorphology. Geoarchaeology 28:87–97.
Mentzer, Susan M., D. G. Romano, and M. E. Voyatzis. 2015. Micromorphological contributions to the study of ritual behavior at the ash altar to Zeus on
Mt. Lykaion, Greece. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, doi:10.1007
/s12520-014-0219-y.
Mercier, N., H. Valladas, L. Froget, J.-L. Joron, J.-L. Reyss, S. Weiner, Paul
Goldberg, L. Meignen, O. Bar-Yosef, and A. Belfer-Cohen. 2007. Hayonim
Cave: a TL-based chronology for this Levantine Mousterian sequence. Journal of Archaeological Science 34:1064–1077.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer

Recognizing Paleolithic Fire

Michel, V., C. Falguères, and J.-M. Dolo. 1998. ESR signal behavior study at
g ∼ 2.002 of modern and fossil bones for heating palaeotemperature assessment. Radiation measurements 29:95–103.
Miller, Christopher E. 2015. A tale of two Swabian caves: geoarchaeological
investigations at Hohle Fels and Geißenklösterle. Tübingen Publications in
Prehistory. Tübingen: Kerns.
Miller, Christopher E., Paul Goldberg, and Francesco Berna. 2013. Geoarchaeological investigations at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape, South
Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:3432–3452.
Movius, H. L. J. 1966. The hearths of the Upper Perigordian and Aurignacian
horizons at the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies (Dordogne), and their possible signiﬁcance. American Anthropologist 68:296–325.
Oakley, K. P. 1954. Evidence of ﬁre in South African cave deposits. Nature
174:261–262.
Pigati, J. S., J. P. McGeehin, G. L. Skipp, and D. R. Muhs. 2014. Evidence
of repeated wildﬁres prior to human occupation on San Nicolas Island,
California. Monographs of the Western North American Naturalist 7:35–47.
Piperno, D. R. 2006. Phytoliths: a comprehensive guide for archaeologists and
paleoecologists. Lanham, MD: AltaMira.
Regev, L., K. M. Poduska, L. Addadi, S. Weiner, and E. Boaretto. 2010. Distinguishing between calcites formed by different mechanisms using infrared
spectrometry: archaeological applications. Journal of Archaeological Science
37:3022–3029.
Renfrew, C., and P. Bahn. 2007. Archaeological essentials. New York: Thames &
Hudson.
Richter, D. 2007. Advantages and limitations of thermoluminescence dating
of heated ﬂint from Paleolithic sites. Geoarchaeology 22:671–683.
Roebroeks, W., and P. Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
108:5209–5214.
Rogers, K., and P. Daniels. 2002. An X-ray diffraction study of the effects of
heat treatment on bone mineral microstructure. Biomaterials 23:2577–2585.
Sandgathe, Dennis M. 2017. Identifying and describing pattern and process in
the evolution of hominin use of ﬁre. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):
S360–S370.
Schiegl, S., Paul Goldberg, O. Bar-Yosef, and S. Weiner. 1996. Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara Caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological implications. Journal of
Archaeological Science 23:763–781.
Schiegl, S., Paul Goldberg, H.-U. Pfretzschner, and N. J. Conard. 2003. Paleolithic burnt bone horizons from the Swabian Jura: distinguishing between in situ ﬁre places and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology 18:541–565.
Schiegl, S., S. Lev-Yadun, O. Bar-Yosef, A. El Goresy, and S. Weiner. 1994.
Siliceous aggregates from prehistoric wood ash: a major component of
sediments in Kebara and Hayonim Caves (Israel). Israel Journal of Earth
Sciences 43:267–278.
Schiegl, S., and H. Thieme. 2007. Auf den Spuren von Feuer in Schöningen 13
II-4. In Die Schöninger Speere-Menschen und Jagd vor 400,000 Jahren.
H. Thieme, ed. Pp. 167–171. Stuttgart: Theis.
Schmidt, P., S. Masse, G. Laurent, A. Slodczyk, E. Le Bourhis, C. Perrenoud, J.
Livage, and F. Fröhlich. 2012. Crystallographic and structural transformations
of sedimentary chalcedony in ﬂint upon heat treatment. Journal of Archaeological Science 39:135–144.
Schmidt, P., G. Porraz, A. Slodczyk, L. Bellot-Gurlet, W. Archer, and
Christopher E. Miller. 2013. Heat treatment in the South African Middle
Stone Age: temperature induced transformations of silcrete and their technological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:3519–3531.
Schurr, M. R., and R. G. Hayes. 2008. Stable carbon- and nitrogen-isotope ratios
and electron spin resonance (ESR) g-values of charred bones: changes with
heating and a critical evaluation of the utility of g-values for reconstructing
thermal history and original isotope ratios. Journal of Archaeological Science
35:2017–2031.
Scott, A. C. 2000. The pre-Quaternary history of ﬁre. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 164:281–329.
Shahack-Gross, R., and A. Ayalon. 2013. Stable carbon and oxygen isotopic
compositions of wood ash: an experimental study with archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:570–578.
Shahack-Gross, R., A. Ayalon, Paul Goldberg, Y. Goren, B. Ofek, R. Rabinovich, and E. Hovers. 2008. Formation processes of cemented features in
karstic cave sites revealed using stable oxygen and carbon isotopic analyses:
a case study at Middle Paleolithic Amud Cave, Israel. Geoarchaeology 23:
43–62.

S189
Shahack-Gross, R., O. Bar-Yosef, and S. Weiner. 1997. Black-coloured bones
in Hayonim Cave, Israel: differentiating between burning and oxide staining.
Journal of Archaeological Science 24:439–446.
Shahack-Gross, R., Francesco Berna, P. Karkanas, C. Lemorini, Avi Gopher,
and Ran Barkai. 2014. Evidence for the repeated use of a central hearth at
Middle Pleistocene (300 ky ago) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 44:12–21.
Shipman, P., G. Foster, and M. Schoeninger. 1984. Burnt bones and teeth: an
experimental study of color, morphology, crystal structure and shrinkage.
Journal of Archaeological Science 11:307–325.
Sistiaga, A., R. March, C. M. Hernández Gómez, and B. Galván Santos. 2011.
Aproximación desde la química orgánica al estudio de los hogares del
yacimiento del Paleolítico medio de El Salt (Alicante, España). Recerques
del Museu d’Alcoi 20:47–70.
Stahlschmidt, M. C., Christopher E. Miller, B. Ligouis, U. Hambach, Paul
Goldberg, Francesco Berna, D. Richter, B. Urban, J. Serangeli, and N. J.
Conard. 2015. On the evidence for human use and control of ﬁre at Schöningen. Journal of Human Evolution 89:181–201.
Stiner, M. C., S. L. Kuhn, T. A. Surovell, Paul Goldberg, L. Meignen, S. Weiner,
and O. Bar-Yosef. 2001. Bone preservation in Hayonim Cave (Israel): a
macroscopic and mineralogical study. Journal of Archaeological Science 28:
643–659.
Stiner, M. C., S. L. Kuhn, S. Weiner, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1995. Differential
burning, recyrstallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. Journal of Archaeological Science 22:223–237.
Stoops, G. 2003. Guidelines for analysis and description of soil and regolith
thin sections. Madison, WI: Soil Science Society of America.
Suá rez-Ruiz, I. 2012. Organic petrology: an overview. In Petrology: new perspectives and applications. A. Al-Juboury, ed. Rijeka, Croatia: INTECH, doi:10
.5772/23431. https://www.intechopen.com/books/petrology-new-perspectives
-and-applications/organic-petrology-an-overview.
Taylor, G. H., M. Teichmüller, D. A., Diessel, C. F. K., R. Littke, and P. Robert.
1998. Organic petrology. Berlin-Stuttgart: Gebrüder Bornträger.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. 1934. Les fouilles préhistoriques de Péking. Revue
des Questions Scientiﬁques 25:181–193.
Thieme, H. 1997. Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature
385:807–810.
———. 1999. Altpaläolithische Holzgeräte aus Schöningen, Lkr. Helmstedt:
Bedeutsame Funde zur Kulturentwicklung des frühen Menschen. Germania
77:451–487.
Thompson, T. J. U., M. Islam, and M. Bonniere. 2013. A new statistical approach for determining the crystallinity of heat-altered bone mineral from
FTIR spectra. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:416–422.
Thoms, A. V. 2008. The ﬁre stones carry: ethnographic records and archaeological expectations for hot-rock cookery in western North America. Journal
of Anthropological Archaeology 27:443–460.
———. 2009. Rocks of ages: propagation of hot-rock cookery in western
North America. Journal of Archaeological Science 36:573–591.
Toffolo, M., A. M. Maeir, J. R. Chadwick, and E. Boaretto. 2012. Characterization of contexts for radiocarbon dating: results from the early Iron Age
at Tell es-Saﬁ/Gath, Israel. Radiocarbon 54:371–390.
Wadley, L., C. Sievers, M. Bamford, Paul Goldberg, Francesco Berna, and
Christopher Miller. 2011. Middle Stone Age bedding construction and
settlement patterns at Sibudu, South Africa. Science 334:1388–1391.
Wattez, J. 1988. Contribution à la connaissance des foyers préhistoriques par
l’étude des cendres. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Française 85:353–
366.
Weiner, S. 2010. Microarchaeology: beyond the visible archaeological record.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Weiner, S., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1990. States of preservation of bones from prehistoric sites in the Near East: a survey. Journal of Archaeological Science
17:187–196.
Weiner, S., Francesco Berna, I. Cohen-Ofri, R. Shahack-Gross, R. M. Albert,
P. Karkanas, L. Meignen, and O. Bar-Yosef. 2007. Mineral distributions in
Kebara Cave: diagenesis and its effect on the archaeological record. In Kebara
Cave, Mt. Carmel, Israel: the Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeology.
O. Bar-Yosef and L. Meignen, eds. Pp. 131–146. American School of Prehistoric Research Bulletin 49. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University.
Weiner, S., and Paul Goldberg. 1990. On site Fourier transform-infrared
spectrometry at an archaeological excavation. Spectroscopy International 2(2):
38–42.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S190

Current Anthropology

Weiner, S., Paul Goldberg, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1993. Bone preservation in
Kebara Cave, Israel using on-site Fourier transform infrared spectrometry.
Journal of Archaeological Science 20:613–627.
———. 2002. Three-dimensional distribution of minerals in the sediments of
Hayonim Cave, Israel: diagenetic processes and archaeological implications.
Journal of Archaeological Science 29:1289–1308.
Weiner, S., S. Schiegl, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1995. Recognizing ash deposits in the
archaeological record: a mineralogical study at Kebara and Hayonim caves,
Israel. Acta Anthropologica Sinica 14:340–351.
Weiner, S., S. Schiegl, Paul Goldberg, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1995. Mineral assemblages in Kebara and Hayonim Caves, Israel: excavation strategies, bone

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

preservation, and wood ash remnants. Israel Journal of Chemistry 35:143–
154.
Weiner, S., Q. Xu, Paul Goldberg, J. Liu, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1998. Evidence for
the use of ﬁre at Zhoukoudian, China. Science 281:251–253.
Weymouth, J. W., and M. Mandeville. 1975. An X-ray diffraction study
of heat-treated chert and its archaeological implications. Archaeometry 17:
61–67.
Wu, R., and S. Lin. 1983. Peking Man. Scientiﬁc American 246:86–95.
Xu, B., M. B. Toffolo, L. Regev, E. Boaretto, and K. M. Poduska. 2015. Structural
differences in archaeologically relevant calcite. Analytical Methods 7:9304–
9309.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:00:04 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

