Grape-pressings from northern Greece:
the earliest wine in the Aegean?
S.M. Valamoti1 , M. Mangafa2 , Ch. Koukouli-Chrysanthaki3
& D. Malamidou4
Houses burnt down at the Neolithic site of Dikili Tash in northern Greece preserved the remains
of wild grapes and ﬁgs. The charred shapes showed that there was a pile of grape pips with skins –
clear evidence for the extraction of juice. The authors argue that the juice was probably used to
make wine – towards the end of the ﬁfth millennium BC the earliest so far from the Aegean. The
occupants of the houses also had two-handled cups, providing another clue to consumption of a
special kind.
Keywords: Aegean, Macedonia, Greece, wine, grapes, viticulture

Introduction
The signiﬁcance of the grape and its products, mainly wine, for prehistoric societies in the
Aegean, in particular those of the Bronze Age, has been widely emphasised in the archaeological literature. Both Renfrew (1972) and Gilman (1981) considered viticulture as a key
factor in the emergence of Bronze Age elites. For Renfrew, viticulture (together with the cultivation of the olive) allowed the cultivation of marginal land, thus generating the need for a
redistributive centre. According to Gilman, the high demands of viticulture tied people to
the land and rendered them more vulnerable to control. The product of viticulture, wine, due
to its intoxicating, mind-altering properties could have constituted a very special ‘food substance’, a ‘diet enhancer’ (Sherratt 1999), which could have been used in special social contexts of consumption (Sherratt 1987), feasting in particular (Dietler 2001). Thus wine represents a substance that could have been involved in the negotiation of power (Hamilakis 1996)
and the maintenance of social cohesion in the Aegean (Andreou 2003). The signiﬁcance
of the consumption of a drink, most likely wine, in feasting contexts among Late Bronze
Age societies in the Aegean, is emphasised in recent work on the ‘Mycenaean Feast’ (Wright
2004). The recognition of wine in the archaeological record is therefore of major signiﬁcance.
One method that has been employed for the detection of wine is the chemical analysis of
pottery residues. The identiﬁcation of tartaric acid (Singleton 1995) in pots is a potential
indicator for a grape-based alcoholic beverage. Finds of tartaric acid in vessels from Hajji
Firuz Tepe in Iran, dating to the sixth millennium BC (5400-5000 BC, McGovern et al.
1
2
3
4

Department of Archaeology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54 124 Thessaloniki, Greece (Email:
sval@hist.auth.gr)
Archaeologist/Archaeobotanist (deceased 1998)
Honorary Curator of Antiquities, Archaeological Museum of Kavala, Greece (Email: ckoukouli@yahoo.gr)
Curator of Antiquities, Archaeological Museum of Kavala, Greece (Email: d.malamidou@free.fr)

Received: 27 July 2005; Accepted: 27 February 2006; Revised: 30 March 2006
antiquity 81 (2007): 54–61

54

1996), and from Godin Tepe at a later date in the same region, have been interpreted as the
remains of ‘wine’, a conclusion corroborated by the study of pottery shapes (McGovern &
Mitchel 1995). Residue analysis from the Aegean has identiﬁed ‘wine’ by the end of the third
millennium BC (Early Bronze Age) in vessels from Crete (Tzedakis & Martlew 1999: 145).
Other means employed to infer the use of wine by prehistoric societies include the study
of the remains of the grape-vine found at archaeological sites (Renfrew 1973) and the
recognition of its cultivation through the identiﬁcation of morphologically domesticated
grape pips (Renfrew 1995; 2003). Nevertheless, the association between morphologically
domesticated grape-pips with grape cultivation and wine production is not without its
problems. At what point in the process of the exploitation of the grapevine a change in
morphology of the grape pips took place remains unknown; therefore the possibility that
morphologically wild pips could have derived from cultivated vines and that wine was made
of wild grapes cannot be excluded (Rivera Nunez & Walker 1989). The archaeobotanical
evidence from Greece has led to the suggestion that there was a ‘transitional’ phase during
which the grape pips were neither wild nor domesticated in their entirety (Logothetis 1974;
Renfrew 1995).
A more direct contribution of the archaeobotanical evidence consists of the remains of
grape juice extraction per se. These ﬁnds consist of grape-skins occasionally attached to
grape-pips. Such ﬁnds are reported from the end of the third millennium at Myrtos in
Crete (Renfrew, J. 1972), tentatively identiﬁed as such, and from the end of the second
millennium (Late Bronze Age) at Toumba, Thessalonikis, here experimentally shown to
represent wine pressings (Mangafa et al. 1998).
This paper presents archaeobotanical remains that prove the deliberate use of grape juice,
possibly for the production of a fermented beverage, and most probably some form of
wine. Dating from the end of the ﬁfth millennium BC, this can be claimed as the earliest
occurrence of wine in the Aegean.

Charred wine-pressings from Dikili Tash
Dikili Tash/Philippoi (Figure 1) is a tell-site situated in the Drama plain in eastern
Macedonia, northern Greece (Koukouli et al. 1997). The grape-ﬁnds discussed here represent
part of the charred plant remains from the site, retrieved by ﬂotation (French 1971) of soil
samples. The archaeobotanical samples from Dikili Tash originate from four Late Neolithic
houses destroyed by ﬁre in a major conﬂagration episode dated to the second half of the ﬁfth
millennium BC. The houses were rectangular and parallel to each other, with post-framed
walls. They contained ovens, hearths, storage bins, pots and a wide variety of objects related
to daily activities. Besides the grape ﬁnds (Vitis vinifera L.), the archaeobotanical assemblage
from the site consists of cereal grain, pulse seed, fruits and nuts, stored within the houses
including the following species: einkorn wheat (Triticum monococcum L.), barley (Hordeum
vulgare hexastichum L. var. nudum), lentils (Lens sp.), grass pea (Lathyrus sativus L.), ﬁgs
(Ficus carica L.), wild pear (Pyrus sp.) and acorns (Quercus sp.) (Valamoti 2004).
The remains of the grapes originate from the ﬂoor debris of one of the Late Neolithic
Houses, House 1, (several grape pips were also retrieved from earlier excavations at Dikili
Tash, published in Renfrew 2003). The grape pips have been directly dated to 4460-4000 BC
55

Research

S.M. Valamoti et al.

Grape-pressings from northern Greece

Figure 1. Map of northern Greece indicating location of Dikili Tash.

(N.C.S.R. Demokritos, Laboratory of Archaeometry (Y. Maniatis, G. Fakorellis), sample
DEM 179; calibrated following Stuiver & Reimer 1993, Stuiver et al. 1998). They originate
from the southern area of the house and consist of a total of 2460 grape pips and a large
number (more than 300) of empty, pressed grape skins occasionally attached to grape pips
(Figures 2 & 3). Measurements carried out on the grape pips from House 1 at Dikili Tash
suggest that the grapes used at the site were morphologically wild (Mangafa & Kotsakis
1996). Two possibilities seem plausible for the House 1, Dikili Tash grapes: they were either
harvested from wild plants or they originated from plants at a very early stage of tending
or cultivation (before the development of pips bearing the morphological characteristics
of domestication). The region of the Drama plain is within the geographical distribution
of the wild vine, V. vinifera sylvestris (Logothetis 1962) and has been detected in pollen
proﬁles from the Drama plain, in the vicinity of Dikili Tash, between 13 000-10 000 BP
(Wijmstra 1969). Grape pollen has been found in various locations in northern Greece with
an increasing, but spatially and temporally discontinuous, presence since the beginning of
the Holocene. There is a signiﬁcant rise from 3500 BP onwards, the increase being related
to human activity and the cultivation of the grape vine (Bottema 1982).
The most interesting feature of this grape concentration is the presence of grape skin
attached to grape pips, and of loose grape skins (Figure 3). Experimental charring of fresh
grapes, raisins and waste products of wine production, i.e. ‘wine-pressings’ (tsipoura or
stemphyla in Greek), indicated that modern wine pressings, when charred at temperatures
of the range that would yield charred remains similar to those found at archaeological sites,
preserve the original morphological characteristics prior to charring, i.e. pips surrounded by
skins and loose skins, and are morphologically distinct from charred raisins and fresh grapes
(Mangafa et al. 1998). On the basis of this experiment, the archaeological remains of grapes
from Dikili Tash morphologically resemble ‘wine-pressings’ and could not have originated
from charred grapes or raisins. We can therefore conclude with some certainty that the
56

Research

S.M. Valamoti et al.

Figure 2. Charred grape pips and ‘wine-pressings’ from Late Neolithic Dikili Tash (scale: 1cm).

Figure 3. Charred ‘wine pressings’ from Late Neolithic Dikili Tash (detail of four specimens; scale: 5mm).

57

Grape-pressings from northern Greece

concentration of grapes found at Dikili Tash represents the by-products of extracting juice
from grapes.
The high number of pips as well as the homogeneous composition of the sample implies a
process of deliberate concentration of grape ﬂesh or juice. Their location in the house could
be related to the storage of the by-products for use as animal fodder or preservative (Foxhall
1998). Alternatively they could represent the actual grape juice with the wine pressings, kept
perhaps in a wooden or leather container that did not survive the destruction by ﬁre.

Discussion
The Dikili Tash ﬁnds suggest that juice from morphologically wild grapes was being
extracted at the end of the ﬁfth millennium BC. Although the end product may well have
been wine, we should begin by considering more immediate uses of the juice. Grape juice
or must (moustos in Greek), is traditionally used in modern Greece for the preparation of
sweets, mixed for example with ﬂour. It is also transformed by boiling to a condensed syrup
called petimezi, occasionally mixed with ash and used as a sweetener in various recipes. Such
products made of ‘boiled down’ must are mentioned by ancient Greek and Roman writers
and prepared in modern Turkey (Gorny 1995). There is no reason to exclude such uses for
the Dikili Tash grapes.
The production of wine, however, is also probable. If this were the case, the remains
of ‘wine-pressings’ could have been contained within a wooden vessel where fermentation
could have been under way. These pressings give colour but also a bitter taste to wine as
they are rich in tannins (Singleton 1995); therefore they could not have been left with the
juice for a long time.
What would the taste of this fruit juice or wine have been like? This is partly dependant
on the type of grapes used, i.e. whether they belonged to the wild (Vitis vinifera sylvestris) or
domesticated (Vitis vinifera vinifera) variety. Wild grapes are known to have a bitter taste,
low in sugar with a skin rich in tannins, yet they can be used to make wine (Singleton
1995). Whichever form of grapevine was used by the Dikili Tash inhabitants, it must have
produced enough to make the extraction of juice worthwhile. The use of wild grapes for
the production of wine is a strong possibility and it could have been rendered sweet with
the addition of honey (Palmer 1995; Gorny 1995) or perhaps sweet fruits like ﬁgs. Whole
ﬁgs were also found charred in the Dikili Tash houses, therefore all the ingredients for the
production of an alcoholic beverage were available. In fact, it might have made more sense
to produce a fermented beverage rather than a syrup had the grapes been of the bitter wild
form. On the other hand, there is no reason to assume that Neolithic fermented beverages
and other foodstuffs need be agreeable to our modern taste, addicted as it is to sweet things
(Sherratt 1995).
The grape pips and wine-pressings from Dikili Tash, suggest that the use of grapes
for the production of wine could have started irrespective of whether the plant had
been domesticated or not, and that therefore viticulture is not a prerequisite for wine
production. This point has been raised by McGovern (1995) and Singleton (1995) but
it has not been possible to demonstrate it on the basis of archaeological ﬁnds: tartaric
acid is present in both wild and domesticated grapes, therefore chemical analysis cannot
58

show whether juice/wine from wild or domesticated grapes was included in the vessels
where tartaric acid has been found. Secondly the ﬁnds lend support to earlier views
that wine production, viticulture and the domestication of the grape vine could have
taken place independently in various parts within the broad region of the grape vine’s
natural distribution, northern Greece being one of them, rather than in one region
such as the Near East (Zohary 1995) and Anatolia or the Caspian (Olmo 1995). The
assemblage from the Neolithic houses of Dikili Tash includes two-handled cups and jars
that suggest a use for decanting and consuming liquids (Figure 4). Later on, the pottery
evidence during the third millennium BC
from Sitagroi V (Renfrew 1986: pl. XXII,
1, 2), in the same broad region as Dikili Tash,
as well as evidence from other sites, indicates
a widespread use of such cups, implying the
consumption of some form of beverage. An
Figure 4. Cups from Final Neolithic Dikili Tash: a) twoearly consumption of fermented beverages
handled cup from House 1 (height: 16cm), b) one-handled
since the beginning of the Neolithic has been
cup from House 4 (scale: 2cm).
argued by Whittle (1996). In light of these
arguments, the cups with personiﬁed decorations that were deposited during or after large
scale feasting, recently recognised at Makriyalos in northern Greece and dating to the ﬁrst
half of the ﬁfth millennium BC (Pappa et al. 2004), call for a content worthy of the
circumstances, perhaps wine.

Conclusion
This ﬁnd from Dikili Tash represents the earliest evidence for the use of grape juice and/or
wine in the Aegean, and the eastern Mediterranean in general, during the Neolithic period.
The question of whether wine was indeed produced from the juice extracted from the Dikili
Tash grapes remains open, yet the archaeobotanical evidence from the site is as good as the
evidence from chemical analysis of pottery residues. Neither the presence of tartaric acid in
pottery residues (cf. McGovern & Mitchel 1995), nor of ‘wine pressings’ in archaeological
deposits, such as those found at Dikili Tash, can deﬁnitively prove that the grape product
in question was indeed wine. Nevertheless, some support for the production of fermented
beverages based on grapes is provided by the pottery cups.
The Dikili Tash ﬁnds predate by nearly one millennium the recently announced ﬁnd of the
earliest remains of wine from the site of Erimi in Cyprus by Maria Rosaria Belgiorno (2005).
The remains of grape-juice extraction from Late Neolithic Dikili Tash in eastern Macedonia,
northern Greece, provide the best and oldest indication, so far, for the production of an
alcoholic beverage based on grapes, i.e. some form of wine, in the Aegean during the second
half of the ﬁfth millennium BC.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the following for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper: M. Carver,
P. Halstead and J. Renfrew. We also thank G. Jones for pointing out, back in 1989, the need for charring
experiments on modern grapes, raisins and wine-pressings.

59

Research

S.M. Valamoti et al.

Grape-pressings from northern Greece

References
Andreou, S. 2003. H Mυκηναϊκή κεραµική και oι
κoινωνίες της κεντρικής Mακεδoνίας κατά
την ´Yστερη Eπoχή τoυ Xαλκoύ (Mycenean
pottery and societies of central Macedonia during
the Late Bronze Age), in The Periphery of the
Mycenean World (Proceedings of the 2nd
Interdisciplinary Colloquium, Lamia 1999).
Athens: Greek Ministry of Culture.
Belgiorno, M.R. 2005. dsc.discovery.com/news/
briefs/20050523/wine.html.
Bottema, S. 1982 (1985). Palynological investigations
in Greece with special reference to pollen as an
indicator of human activity. Palaeohistoria 24:
257-89.
Dietler, M. 2001. Theorizing the feast: rituals of
consumption, commensal politics and power in
African contexts, in M. Dietler & B. Hayden (ed.)
Feasts: archaeological and ethnographic perspectives on
Food, Politics and Power: 65-114. Washington:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Foxhall, L. 1998. Snapping up the unconsidered
triﬂes: the use of agricultural residues in ancient
Greek and Roman farming. Environmental
Archaeology 1: 35-40.
French, D.H. 1971. An experiment in water-sieving.
Anatolian Studies 21: 59-64.
Gilman, A. 1981. The development of social
stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe. Current
Anthropology 22: 1-8.
Gorny, R.L. 1995. Viticulture in ancient Anatolia, in
P.E. McGovern, S.J. Fleming & S.H. Katz (ed.)
The Origins and Ancient History of Wine: 133-74.
New York: Gordon & Breach.
Hamilakis, Y. 1996. Wine, oil and the dialectics of
power in Bronze Age Crete: a review of the
evidence. Oxford Journal of Archaeology 15: 1-32.
Koukouli-Chrysanthaki, ch., R. Treuil &
D. Malamidou. 1997. D. Prehistoric settlement
Philippoi/Dikili Tash: ten years of excavation.
AEMTH 10β: 681-704.
Logothetis, V. 1962. Les Vignes Sauvages (Vitis
vinifera L. ssp. silvestris Gmel.) en tant que matériel
primitif viticole en Grèce. Scientiﬁc Annals of the
Arisitotle University Department of Agriculture and
Forest: 1-43.
–1974. Contribution of the grape vine and wine in
Greek and Eastern Mediterranean civilization.
Scientiﬁc Annals of the University of Thessaloniki 17:
1-286.
Mangafa, M. & K. Kotsakis. 1996. A new method
for the identiﬁcation of wild and cultivated charred
grape seeds. Journal of Archaeological Science 23:
409-18.

Mangafa, M., K. Kotsakis & S. Andreou. 1998.
Aµπελoκαλλιέργεια στην πρoϊστoρική
Mακεδoνία (Viticulture in Prehistoric Macedonia:
evidence from Prehistoric Toumba Thessalonikis),
in Aµπ ελo o ινική I σ τ oρία σ τ o X ώρo τ ης
Mακεδo νίας και τ ης ράκης (History of
Viticulture and Wine in Macedonia and Thrace):
158-69. Athens: ETBA Publications.
McGovern, P.E. 1995. Introduction, in P.E.
McGovern, S.J. Fleming & S.H. Katz (ed.)
The Origins and Ancient History of Wine: ix-xv.
New York: Gordon & Breach.
McGovern, P.E. & R.H. Mitchel. 1995. The
analytical and archaeological challenge of detecting
ancient wine: two case studies from the ancient
Near East, in P.E. McGovern, S.J. Fleming & S.H.
Katz (ed.) The Origins and Ancient History of Wine:
57-65. New York: Gordon & Breach.
McGovern, P., D.L. Glusker, L.J. Exner & M.M.
Voight. 1996. Neolithic resinated wine. Nature
381: 480-81.
Olmo, H.P. 1995. The origin and domestication of the
Vinifera grape, in P.E. McGovern, S.J. Fleming &
S.H. Katz (ed.) The Origins and Ancient History of
Wine: 31-43. New York: Gordon & Breach.
Palmer, R. 1995. Wine and Viticulture in the Linear A
and B texts of the Bronze Age Aegean, in P.E.
McGovern, S.J. Fleming & S.H. Katz (ed.) The
Origins and Ancient History of Wine: 269-85.
New York: Gordon & Breach.
Pappa, M., P. Halstead, K. Kotsakis & D.
Urem-Kotsou. 2004. Evidence for large-scale
feasting at Late Neolithic Makriyalos, N Greece, in
P. Halstead & J. Barrett (ed.) Food, Cuisine and
Society in Prehistoric Greece: 16-44. (Shefﬁeld
Studies in Aegean Archaeology 5). Oxford: Oxbow
Books.
Renfrew, C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilisation: The
Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third Millennium
BC. London: Methuen.
Renfrew, C., M. Gimbutas & E. Elster (ed.). 1986.
Excavations at Sitagroi. Los Angeles (CA):
(Monumenta Archaeologica 13) The Institute of
Archaeology.
Renfrew, J. 1972. Appendix V: The plant remains, in
P. Warren (ed.) Myrtos: An Early Bronze Age
Settlement in Crete, (BSA suppl. 7): 315-17.
London: Thames & Hudson.
–1973. Palaeoethnobotany. The Prehistoric Food Plants of
the Near East and Europe. New York: Columbia
University Press.

60

Stuiver, M. & P.J. Reimer. 1993. Radiocarbon
Calibration Program Rev. 4.3. Radiocarbon 35:
215-30.
Stuiver, M., P.J. Reimer, E. Bard, J.W. Beck, G.S.
Burr, K.A. Hughen, B. Kromer, F.G.
McCormac, J. van der Plicht & M. Spurk.
1998. INTCAL98 Radiocarbon Age Calibration,
24 000–0 cal BP. Radiocarbon 40 (3): 1041-83.
Tzedakis, Y. & H. Martlew (ed.). 1999. Minoans and
Myceneans - Flavours of their Time. Athens: Greek
Ministry of Culture.
Valamoti, S.-M. 2004. Plants and People in Late
Neolithic and Early Bronze Age Northern Greece
(British Archaeological Reports IS 1258). Oxford:
British Archaeological Reports.
Whittle, A. 1996. Europe in the Neolithic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wijmstra, T.A. 1969. Palynology of the ﬁrst 30 metres
of a 120m deep section in northern Greece. Acta
Bot. Neerl. 18: 511-27.
Wright, J.C. 2004. The Mycenaean Feast. Hesperia
73: 133-78.
Zohary, D. 1995. The domestication of the grapevine
Vitis vinifera L. in the Near East, in P.E. McGovern,
S.J. Fleming & S.H. Katz (ed.) The Origins and
Ancient History of Wine: 23-30. New York:
Gordon & Breach.

–1995. Palaeoethnobotanical ﬁnds of Vitis from Greece,
in P.E. McGovern, S.J. Fleming & S.H. Katz (ed.)
The Origins and Ancient History of Wine: 255-67.
New York: Gordon & Breach.
–2003. Grains, seeds, and fruits from Prehistoric
Sitagroi, in E.S. Elster & C. Renfrew (ed.)
Prehistoric Sitagroi: Excavations in Northeast Greece,
1968-1970. Volume 2: The Final Report
(Monumenta Archaeologica 20): 1-29. Los Angeles:
Cotsen Institute of Archaeology.
Rivera Nunez, D. & M.J. Walker. 1989. A review of
palaeobotanical ﬁndings of early Vitis in the
Mediterranean and of the origins of cultivated
grape-vines, with special reference to new pointers
to Prehistoric exploitation in the western
Mediterranean. Review of Palaeobotany and
Palynology 61: 205-37.
Sherratt, A. 1987. Cups That Cheered, in W.H.
Waldren & R.C. Kennard (ed.) Bell Beakers of the
Western Mediterranean (British Archaeological
Reports SS331 i): 81-114. Oxford: British
Archaeological Reports.
–1999. Cash-crops before cash: organic consumables
and trade, in C. Gosden & J. Hather (ed.) The
Prehistory of Food, Appetites for change: 13-34.
London: Routledge.
Singleton, V.L. 1995. An Enologist’s commentary on
ancient wines, in P.E. McGovern, S.J. Fleming &
S.H. Katz (ed.) The Origins and Ancient History of
Wine: 67-77. New York: Gordon & Breach.

61

Research

S.M. Valamoti et al.

