J Archaeol Method Theory (2014) 21:616–668
DOI 10.1007/s10816-012-9163-2

Microarchaeological Approaches to the Identification
and Interpretation of Combustion Features
in Prehistoric Archaeological Sites
Susan M. Mentzer

Published online: 8 November 2012
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2012

Abstract Combustion features inform archaeologists about the prehistoric use of
space, subsistence behaviors, and tempo of site visitation. Their study in the field is
difficult because burned sediments are susceptible to reworking and diagenesis.
Microarchaeological analyses, including micromorphology, are essential for documenting the composition, preservation, and function of hearths and other burned
residues. These investigations focus on the description of fuels, depositional fabrics
and structures, and mineralogy. As evidenced by a literature review, microarchaeological analyses have much to offer Paleolithic archaeologists, while applications of
the techniques to Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene sites and in ethnographic or
experimental contexts are presently rare.
Keywords Hearth . Micromorphology . Ashes . Charcoal . Controlled use of fire

Introduction
Combustion features in archaeological sites take many forms. Intact combustion
structures are commonly known as hearths. Although the term is widely used to
describe a combustion feature that exhibits elements of intentional preparation, such
as basal pavings or a rock-lined perimeter, Dibble et al. (2009, p. 187) define a
“hearth” as “the remnants of a domestic fire feature that retains some or most of its
S. M. Mentzer
Tübingen Senckenberg Center for Human Evolution and Paleoecology, Rümelinstr. 23, 72070
Tübingen, Germany
S. M. Mentzer (*)
INA—Institute for Archaeological Sciences, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Rümelinstr. 23,
72070 Tübingen, Germany
e-mail: susan.mentzer@ifu.uni-tuebingen.de
S. M. Mentzer
Department of Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

617

original structural or compositional elements (e.g. organic matter and overlying ash).”
Less intact features may be termed “hearth areas” or “combustion areas” to distinguish these fire traces from well-preserved hearths. Here, the terms “hearth” and
“combustion structure” are employed in a similar sense, while the term “combustion
feature” signifies a more general category that includes hearths and burned materials
in secondary position due to human activities or natural processes.
Hearths and their numerous permutations may represent the remnants of (1) single
events or short-lived activities (Berna and Goldberg 2008; Goldberg et al. 2012),
forming in a matter of minutes or hours; (2) a central activity in a permanent or
semipermanent occupation of a site, persisting for months when well-maintained
(Mallol et al. 2007); or (3) repeated opportunistic use of the same space over many
seasons or years. Moreover, a single hearth or horizontal hearth area usually defines
an ancient surface that was used for a wider range of economic and social activities.
The study of hearths and other combustion features can, therefore, contribute to the
quest for the ever-elusive “living floor” (Dibble et al. 1997) or to the identification of
communal spaces. Combustion features also permit relatively expedient evaluation of
the impacts of postdepositional processes on the character of their sediments. For
example, investigations of chemical alteration using the mineralogical or elemental
composition of sediments can be carried out in the field (e.g., Eliyahu-Behar et al.
2009; Schiegl et al. 1996; Weiner 2010). Finally, hearths provide sources of material
that can be dated using radiometric, paleomagnetic, and luminescence methods. Wellpreserved charcoal can yield radiocarbon ages as old as 60 kyr BP (Bird et al. 2003);
calcined bone may also be dated (Lanting et al. 2001). Thermoluminescence and
optically stimulated luminescence techniques can be applied to even older materials,
depending on the dose rates in and around the heated rocks and sediments (Aitken
1985, 1998). In sum, in an archaeological sequence, several meters thick combustion
features and their contents are attractive sources of information about continuity and
change in hominin behavior and sediment chemistry over time.
At the most basic level, the presence of a hearth in a site implies, first, an ability to
acquire and/or produce and control fire and, second, a need for fire for cooking, light,
heat, or a combination of these benefits. Therefore, a burning question in Paleolithic
archaeology is when and where the controlled use of fire first appeared in the
archaeological record. This question is key to the testing of the hypothesis proposed
by Wrangham and colleagues (Carmody and Wrangham 2009; Wrangham and
Carmody 2010; Wrangham 2007, 2010; Wrangham et al. 1999) that the cooking of
food was a crucial behavioral development in the history of our genus. A recent
literature review in search of the answer led Roebroeks and Villa (2011) to conclude
that the first hominins to enter Europe did not possess fire technology. Although
burned materials, such as heated flints or rubified1 earth, are present in several Lower
Paleolithic sites (e.g., Alperson-Afil et al. 2009; Goren-Inbar et al. 2004), James et al.
(1989) insist that the best evidence for intentional burning in an archaeological site is
the presence of an intact combustion structure.
An intact combustion structure is an archaeological feature that contains the byproducts of burning in stratigraphic position within the original burning locality. The

1

Also spelled “rubefied.”

618

Mentzer

presence of an intact combustion structure implies that burning occurred in situ. The
materials recovered within an intact combustion structure may also be termed in situ.
Following this possibly overstrict criterion for the existence of fire technology,
some of the oldest intact combustion structures that have been described in the field
and supported with micromorphological and geochemical identification of burned
materials are the Amudian (400–200 ka BP) hearths in Qesem Cave, Israel (Barkai et
al. 2003; Karkanas et al. 2007). In the upper deposits of this site, intact combustion
structures composed of calcitic wood ashes are accompanied by burned bones and
heated lithic artifacts. The recently reported burned materials in ∼1.0 mya deposits in
Wonderwerk Cave, South Africa (Berna et al. 2012) are significantly older than the
combustion structures at Qesem Cave. However, the ash layers and burned bones
identified in Wonderwerk Cave are not associated with intact structures.
The Qesem Cave and Wonderwerk Cave studies, like numerous other Paleolithic
projects, utilize the technique of micromorphology to identify the by-products of
burning and to determine whether these by-products are in situ or reworked by human
activity or natural processes (Karkanas et al. 2007). Micromorphology is one of a
number of analytical approaches that fall under the category of “microarchaeology”
(sensu Weiner 2010). The most common of these approaches with applications in the
study of combustion features are summarized in Table 1. In fact, a critique of the
sparse evidence for controlled fire in the Lower Paleolithic (e.g., James et al. 1989),
as well as more recent skepticism over the ubiquitous presence of intact hearths in
Middle Paleolithic sites in Europe (e.g., Perlès 1981; Sandgathe et al. 2011), help to
account for the development and growing adoption of microarchaeological techniques by the Paleolithic archaeological community. The impact of these investigations
includes a proliferation in the types of combustion-related behaviors recognized in
archaeological sites, a greater understanding of the different phenomena that influence the morphology and composition of combustion features (Table 2), and a strong
bias in research efforts towards the earliest periods of human history.
The following text outlines the microarchaeological criteria that, in conjunction
with field-based observations, are crucial to the identification of combustion structures and burned materials in secondary position. The aim of this paper is to
highlight the types of information that can be generated when one applies a
microarchaeological approach to Paleolithic and later archaeological records; these
methods are currently underused in research on Epipaleolithic and Mesolithic sites
and their African and New World equivalents. Discussion includes published
observations from sites dating primarily to the Pleistocene and Early Holocene,
as well as later periods, as appropriate; sites located in both the Old and New
Worlds; and experimental and ethnographic studies. Examples from later periods
are provided, as appropriate. Specialized fire technologies that become widespread
in the Holocene in association with agriculture or urbanization, such as the regular
burning of animal dung in caves, human cremations, metallurgy, ceramic production, lime processing, or the use of permanent constructed features (“fire installations”; sensu Crawford 1981) including kilns and ovens, are not included in this
article. The large number of cited Middle Paleolithic or Middle Stone Age cases
represents a concentration of interest in fire technology during these periods. The
technique of micromorphology is also emphasized over other approaches due to its
widespread use and versatility.

Description

The analysis of intact and oriented
archaeological sediments mounted
on thin sections using an optical
petrographic microscope at low to
moderate magnifications (×2–500).
Additional types of equipment
include flatbed scanners and
fluorescence microscopes.

The analysis of loose sediment
samples mounted on glass slides
using a mounting medium or liquid
(e.g., Canada balsam, Entellan
New®, or clove oil) and cover slip.
Additional types of equipment
include sieves, an optical
petrographic microscope, and
centrifuge (for processing
phytolith samples).

Measurement of the percent
reflectance of charred organic
materials mounted on thin sections
or in resin-impregnated and
polished sample blocks.

Analytical technique

(Archaeological)
micromorphology

Grain mount
analysis

Reflectance
petrography

To determine the temperature
of burning of organic materials
and to identify phases such
as chars and gels.

Identifying alternative fuel
sources such as coal

Determining the temperature
of combustion of charcoal

Useful for

Observing the presence
of secondary salts

To quickly determine the composition Useful for
of a sediment or certain particle
Identifying ashes
size fraction of a sediment.
Identifying phytoliths
Analyses can be conducted
Identifying microscopic
in the field.
fragments of charcoal

Identifying postdepositional
chemical alteration of burned
materials

Identifying the mechanism and
degree of postdepositional
reworking of burned materials

Determining whether ash and
charcoal layers are in situ using
microfacies analysis

Braadbaart and Poole
2008; Ligouis 2006;
Taylor et al. 1998

Albert and Weiner 2001;
Albert et al. 2000, 2012;
Elbaum et al. 2003;
Matthews 2010;
Weiner 2010,

Arpin et al. 2002; Courty
et al. 1989; Goldberg
et al. 2009

Useful for

To study the composition, fabric
and structure of archaeological
sediments and features.
Identifying calcitic ashes,
phytoliths and microcharcoal

References

Application to the study
of combustion features

Purpose

Table 1 Microarchaeological methods for the description and interpretation of combustion features and their contents

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features
619

The analysis of weight percent
calcium or magnesium carbonate
using acid digestion and
measurement of the volume
of CO2 produced. Requires a

Carbonate
equivalents

To determine the abundance
of calcium or magnesium
carbonate in a sediment
or sieved sedimentary grain
size fraction.

To identify and describe
histological structures
and color in thin section.

The analysis of latitudinal
cross-sections of bones using
petrographic methods.

Histomorphometry

Determining the abundance
of the calcitic fraction of wood
ashes that are present
in a mixed deposit (barring

Useful for

Determining the temperature
of burning of bone

Useful for

Identifying the conditions
and temperature of burning

Identifying deposits that derive
from multiple burning events,
reworked deposits, and
weathered materials

Identifying the types of plants
that were used as fuel
or cooked in a fire

Useful for

Dreimanis 1962

Squires et al. 2011

Asouti 2003; Boardman
and Jones 1990;
Goldberg et al. 1994;
Théry-Parisot et al. 2010

To determine the genus and species
of plant remains. To identify
the plant parts that are present
in a site or feature. To quantify
diversity and fragmentation
of plant assemblages.

The identification of botanical
remains in archaeological sites.
Additional types of equipment
include a flotation device and
a low-magnification stereomicro
scope. Analyses may also be con
ducted on materials in thin section.

Macrobotanical and
microbotanical
analyses and
anthracology

Observing the crystal habits
of diagenetic minerals

Observing the grain
morphologies of wood ashes
and determining the degree
of dissolution (surface etching)
or recrystallization

Courty et al. 1989

Useful for

To observe grain morphologies
and surface textures. Especially
useful for viewing clay-sized
sedimentary components.
Basic elemental composition
and compositional mapping.

The analysis of loose sediments,
thin sections, or resin-impregnated
sample blocks at moderate
to high magnification
(×50–5,000).

Scanning electron
microscopy

References

Application to the study
of combustion features

Purpose

Description

Analytical technique

Table 1 (continued)

620
Mentzer

To determine the mineralogical
composition of archaeological
sediments. To identify changes
to the crystal structure of materials
that result from heating. Analyses
of loose samples can be conducted
in the field.

To determine the elemental
composition of sediments
or materials. To observe
the distribution of individual
elements within a defined
2-D area.

The identification of major and
trace elements present in sediments
mounted on thin sections,
or resin-impregnated
sample blocks.

Electron microprobe,
EDAX, and μ-XRF

Purpose

The identification of molecular
bonds in powdered sediment
samples, in sediments mounted
on thin section, or in
resin-impregnated sediment blocks.

Chittick apparatus
or Dietrich-Früling calcimeter.

Description

FTIR and μ-FTIR

Analytical technique

Table 1 (continued)

Determining the chemical
composition of diagenetic
minerals and sediments identified
in thin section

Useful for

Distinguishing between ash
and natural calcite

Determining the burning
temperatures of clay minerals

Determining the burning
temperatures of bone
fragments

Distinguishing between
stained and charred bone

Determining the mineralogy
of materials identified in thin
section (μ-FTIR)

Identifying the by-products
of postdepositional chemical
alteration of ash deposits

Useful for

additional silt-sized sources
of carbonate)

Application to the study
of combustion features

Courty et al. 1989; Mentzer
and Quade in press;
Sherwood 2008

Berna et al. 2007; Chu
et al. 2008; Goldberg
and Berna 2010; Karkanas
et al. 1999, 2002; Regev
et al. 2010; Schiegl
et al. 2003; Shahack-Gross
et al. 1997; Thompson
et al. 2009; Weiner
et al. 1993

References

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features
621

To identify fatty acids and
their relative abundances.

Lipid analysis

Measurements of the lipid
composition of sediment samples.
Requires a gas chromatography
mass spectrometer.

To identify mineralogical
changes within sediment
that occur as a result
of heating.

Magnetic susceptibility
Measurements of the relative
and magnetic mineralogy degree of different types
of magnetization of sediment
are paired with mineralogical
analysis to identify the
magnetic phases.

To calculate the ratios
Measurement of the relative
abundances of the isotopes of oxygen of 18O to 16O (δ18O;
normalized to a standard)
and carbon in loose sediments
and 13O to 12O (δ13C;
and samples drilled from
normalized to a standard).
resin-impregnated sediment
blocks. Requires a mass
spectrometer.

Stable oxygen and carbon
isotope analysis

Purpose

Description

Analytical technique

Table 1 (continued)

Identifying organic residues
derived from cooking or the
burning of animal
and plant tissues

Useful for

Distinguishing between
rubification due to heating
and rubification due to
other processes

Identifying burned sediments

Useful for

Identifying C3
and C4 plant ashes, temperature
of burning and degree
of recrystallization of ashes

Kedrowski et al. 2009;
March et al. 1989, 1993

Aitken 1978; Herries 2009;
Herries and Fisher 2011;
Herries et al. 2007;
Latham and Herries 2004

Mentzer and Quade in press;
Shahack-Gross et al. 2008;
Shahack-Gross
and Ayalon 2012

Useful for
Identifying of the calcitic
fraction of ashes in highly altered
or cemented deposits

References

Application to the study
of combustion features

622
Mentzer

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

623

Table 2 Archaeological expression of combustion features—some factors that influence the morphology,
composition, internal organization, and structuring
Factor

Archaeological expression

Phase 1: before combustion
Location of combustion space

Position of the combustion area with respect to other activity areas,
structures, or boundaries of the site (e.g., cave walls or entrance)

Substrate composition

Variably heat-altered anthropogenic materials, geogenic sediments,
or bedrock

Substrate shape; modified
or natural

Shape of the feature in profile and plan; nature of the contact between
combustion by-products and substrate; exploitation of bedrock
morphology

Size of combustion area

Shape of the feature in profile and plan

Fuel choice

Morphology and composition of charred and calcined combustible
materials (plants, bone, coal), presence/absence of phytoliths,
composition of noncombustible inclusions, production of charcoal
versus ash

Phase 2: during combustion
Hearth maintenance activities
Fuel additions
Tending/redistribution of fuel

Size, shape, and intensity of burning
High volume of burned material
Intensity of burning
Shape of the feature in profile and plan
Vertical and lateral distribution of burned elements

Combustion area function

Presence of nonfuel materials

Light/heat

Toss zone

Cooking

Food remains (bone, char, shell, seeds)

Refuse disposal

Heated lithic artifacts and debitage

Heat treatment/tool manufacture
Oxygen availability

Ratio of charcoal to ash

Low

High ratio of charcoal to ash

High

Low ratio of charcoal to ash

Phase 3: extinction
Loss of fuel

Complete combustion

Extinction by water

Incomplete combustion

Low ratio of charcoal to ash
High ratio of charcoal to ash
Water-related redistribution
Grain size sorting
Cementation or dissolution
Loss of oxygen

Incomplete combustion

Smothering with sediment

Incomplete combustion

High ratio of charcoal to ash
High ratio of charcoal to ash
Burned sediment on top of partially combusted materials with
sharp contact?

624

Mentzer

Table 2 (continued)
Factor
Wind

Archaeological expression
Incomplete or rapid combustion
Aeolian reworking/textural sorting
Winnowing
High ratio of charcoal to ash

Removal of burning materials

Charred or calcined materials distributed over a wide area
with contact heat alteration of other materials

Phase 4: after combustion
Human activities

Reworking, alteration of feature morphology

New fire built directly atop old
combustion structure

Stacked combustion features; thick, microlaminated ash layers

Hearth cleaning

Loose, unstratified ash deposits; rake-out deposits; truncation
of combustion features in profile

Trampling

Compaction, planar voids, in situ breakage (crushing and
snapping) of bone and charcoal

Construction of bedding areas

Dispersal of combustion by-products, mixture with bedding
materials

Reworking/erosion

General mixing of burned and unburned materials, loss
of combustion area morphology and internal stratigraphy

Water

Laminations, textural sorting, graded bedding, lag deposits,
ash dissolution/cementation

Insect or animal bioturbation

Channel, chamber, crumb, or granular microstructures; fecal
pellets; burrows and passage features

Wind

Winnowing/removal of silt-sized materials, lag deposits

Colluvial processes

Laminations, textural sorting, shearing

Cryoturbation

Fragmentation of burned materials; development of lenticular,
platy, or granular microstructure

Burial

Combustion features or deposits buried by anthropogenic, geogenic,
or biogenic materials

Plant growth

Development of channel microstructure, formation of calcitic
hypocoatings

Moisture

Diagenesis

Low pH

Dissolution of carbonate, volume loss

High pH

Dissolution of silicates, ash recrystallization

Carbonate-saturated water

Petrification or cementation, loss of porosity due to development
of void infillings

Phosphatic solutions

Isovolumetric replacement of ash by secondary phosphatic
minerals and crusts

The first section describes the materials that are produced from the combustion of
wood and other fuels and the types of information they may provide regarding fuel
selection, temperature, and duration of burning. The second section explores the three
most important lines of evidence that suggest that combustion occurred within an
archaeological site: intact hearths, reworked burned materials, and indirect evidence

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

625

Fig. 1 Prior to combustion, plant tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals. Following combustion, ashes
contain aggregates of micritic (<4 μm) calcite crystals that are pseudomorphic after the original calcium
oxalates

for burning. The third section investigates the postdepositional chemical alterations
that impact the three types of deposits in both open-air sites and cave environments.
Differential impacts of postdepositional dissolution, as well as other taphonomic
factors, result in a strong bias towards the recovery of burned materials in cave sites.
Finally, the fourth section outlines the microscopic and geochemical features that, in
well-preserved sites, are indicative of specific combustion-related hominin behaviors.

The By-Products of Combustion
At their most basic level, hearths arise from the interaction of a substrate (typically
bedrock or sediment), a fuel source (typically wood or dry plant material), and a
source of ignition. The by-products of burning shared by all combustion features are
the heat-altered remnants of the original fuel source. In most hearths, these remnants
consist of ash and charcoal.
According to Canti (2003), ash that forms as a result of burning dry plant material2
contains three main components. The first component is calcium carbonate, which
forms as pseudomorphic aggregates of micritic (<4 μm) crystals after the rhombic calcium
oxalate and carbonate crystals that are naturally present in plant tissues (Fig. 1). The
second component is siliceous phytoliths or slag. The third component is soluble salts,
charcoal fragments, and other materials that were present on or in the plant tissues prior
to burning. Rarely, other minerals, such as anhydrite, may be present in ash, depending
on the nature of the fuel source (Shahack-Gross and Finkelstein 2008).
Fresh, pure ash is whitish in color when viewed in recent hearths. This white color
is attributed to both the siliceous and calcitic components (Canti 2003). Other
variations in color result from inclusions, such as fragments of charcoal, which
2

Other types of ash, such as fly ash or volcanic ash, are not considered here.

626

Mentzer

contribute black particles and an overall grayish appearance to the sediment. According to experiments conducted by Wattez (1988, 1992), different burning intensities
can produce color variations in fresh wood ash. Wattez reports that moderate-intensity
burning produces yellow- or brown-colored ashes, while high-intensity heating
produces more typical gray or white ashes. Wattez also notes that these color differences are not frequently reported in archaeological settings (Wattez 1992).
The three main components of ash are not visible to the naked eye. Consequently,
methods of observing ash components include high-magnification analyses of loose
samples. In the field, white sediments may be identified as ash using grain mounts
viewed with a light microscope. In the laboratory, resin-impregnated or carbon-coated
sediment samples can be viewed at low to high magnification using petrographic and
scanning electron microscopes.
At magnifications of ×100–400, one can see that wood ash is composed primarily of
silt-sized grains of calcite crystal aggregates that exhibit rhombic, triangular, or lozengelike morphologies, depending on the orientation of the thin section (Fig. 2). These
characteristic shapes and compositions result from the alteration of calcium oxalate
druses present in plant tissues to micritic (<4 μm) calcite during burning (Fig. 1; see
also Brochier and Thinon 2003, Figs. 1 and 2; Canti 2003, Fig. 3; and Shahack-Gross

Fig. 2 Wood ash composition is dominated by calcium carbonate. a This grain mount of fresh wood ashes
(Chilean mesquite; Prosopis chilensis) contains individual grains composed of aggregates of micritic calcite
crystals with typical rhombic (grey arrow) or triangular (white arrow) morphologies. Experimental sample,
cross-polarized light (XPL). b Individual calcitic druses aligned in anatomical position illustrate the
relationship between the pseudomorphic crystal aggregates and the original oxalate-bearing plant structures. Experimental sample in grain mount, XPL. c In 30-μm-thick petrographic thin sections, two or more
individual rhombs may be stacked in one position, although a single rhomb is visible here within a void
(white arrow). Archaeological sample from Asıklı Höyük, Turkey in thin section, XPL

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

627

and Ayalon 2012, Fig. 2). In some studies, the rhombic grains composed of micritic
crystal aggregates that are present in ashes are described using the acronym POCC for
“pseudomorphose d’oxalate de calcium en calcite” (Brochier and Thinon 2003, p.
1212). Other grains may source from primary calcium carbonates present in plant
tissues (Canti 2003). Grains or aggregates of micrite may be naturally present in
archaeological sediments. For example, calcareous loess may be a primary component
of the silt-sized particle fraction, while some forms of postdepositional precipitation can
produce secondary silt-sized calcitic crystal aggregates. However, the morphologies
described above and in Figs. 1 and 2 are unique to plant ashes. Ashes in archaeological
sites are regarded as the most direct evidence of the use of fire by Schiegl et al. (1996,
p. 764). The presence of rhombic micrite in archaeological sediments is frequently
attributed to the burning of woody plants and shrubs. However, despite early attempts
at classification (e.g., Wattez 1988), more specific correlations between ash morphology and different types of wood have not been found (Canti 2003; Simpson et al.
2003). Recent work by Shahack-Gross and Ayalon (2012) suggests that other properties of ashes, specifically their stable oxygen and carbon isotopic compositions,
may be useful for distinguishing between C3 and C4 plant fuels.
The siliceous component of ashes, likewise visible only above ×100, is composed
of phytoliths or their altered products (Fig. 3). Unlike rhombic micrite aggregates,
phytoliths can provide information about the fuel source if they have not been
significantly altered by heating or chemical degradation (Albert et al. 2000). Phytolith
analyses may reveal not only the genus of the plant, but also the portion of the plant
that was burned. In addition, certain types of plants—particularly grasses and sedges
—produce significantly more phytoliths than calcite after burning (Albert and Weiner
2001; Miller and Sievers 2012). However, some plant species and tissue types, in
particular woody tissues, do not contain phytoliths (Tsartsidou et al. 2007). When
phytoliths are present in ashes, their analyses can be paired with micromorphology
for a much better understanding of fuel choices over the short and long terms (Albert
et al. 2012). Of course, phytoliths may enter archaeological sites as a result of
hominin activities unrelated to combustion, such as in the form of decomposed mats
or bedding (Wadley et al. 2011). Heated phytoliths are distinguished from unheated
ones by measuring the refractive index of the silica (Elbaum et al. 2003). The
analyses of Cabanes et al. (2010) of phytoliths in association with combustion
features at Esquilleu Cave demonstrate the importance of using refractive index
measurements to assess the degree of phytolith heating. In this example, the measurements revealed that wood and bark phytoliths in the combustion features were heated,
while nearby grass phytoliths were not. This distinction suggested that there were at
least two different cultural sources of phytoliths to the sediment—fuel and organic
artifacts. Unfortunately, high temperatures can partly or completely melt phytoliths,
although the resulting phytolith slags or glasses can be recognized by their negative
relief in thin section, isotropy in cross-polarized light (XPL), white–gray color in
oblique incident light, and the presence of internal vesicles (Fig. 3b, c; Canti 2003;
Folk and Hoops 1982; Macphail and Crowther 2007; Zerboni 2011). Following
postdepositional alteration of ashes, phytoliths may also weather into amorphous
materials described as siliceous aggregates (Schiegl et al. 1996). These materials are
also a component of fresh ashes (Schiegl et al. 1994). Although they can be by-

628

Mentzer

Fig. 3 Phytoliths comprise the
siliceous fraction of ashes.
Although visible in thin section,
these materials are best identified
in grain mounts of loose sediment. Burned phytoliths are
identified by color (Parr 2006)
and refractive index (Elbaum
et al. 2003). a Grain mount of
phytoliths in association with
calcitic ashes at the Neolithic site
of Aşıklı Höyük, Turkey; PPL.
b Phytolith slag from the site of
Üçağızlı I, Turkey in thin section. The vesicles in this material
contain air bubbles; PPL.
c Phytolith slag from the site of
Üçağızlı I, Turkey in thin section
(same view as above). The
siliceous material is isotropic
in XPL

products of burning, it is important to understand that siliceous aggregates alone are
not reliable proxies for combustion activities.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

629

Ash preservation in archaeological sites depends on both the depositional environment
and postdepositional processes. Ashes are seldom preserved in open-air Paleolithic sites.
They are most frequently encountered in the sheltered, alkaline environments typical of
caves (Canti 2003). Loose, rhombic micrite aggregates and phytoliths are easily
transported by water and wind. Thus, protected locations (such as caves), or rapid
burial, contribute to ash recovery in excavation. Preservation of ashes also depends
on the amount and chemistry of the water flowing through the sediments. In open-air
sites, ashes near the ground surface may be dissolved by rainwater, which typically
has a pH of 5.6 or lower (Drever 1997). At depth, the pH of infiltrating rainwater and
groundwaters is variable and dependent on soil and sediment composition. The
calcitic fraction of ashes preserves best in alkaline environments, while the siliceous
fraction preserves best in neutral to slightly acidic environments. When very fresh
ashes react with water, rapid dissolution of soluble salts produces highly concentrated
localized groundwater solutions and soil pH as high as 9–13 and 11, respectively (Etiégni
and Campbell 1991; Ulery et al. 1993). These conditions can contribute to the
chemical breakdown of phytoliths and the preservation of the majority of the calcitic
fraction of ashes (Albert et al. 2012; Karkanas et al. 2000). Extremely arid sedimentary environments are conducive to the preservation of both calcitic and siliceous
components of ash because water is unavailable to act as a solvent on the materials.
Sediment texture also promotes or hinders the preservation of ashes. Because
sand- or gravel-rich sediments are typically highly porous, they permit the rapid
infiltration and throughflow of groundwater. Mechanical removal of ashes and,
depending on the groundwater pH, dissolution may occur rapidly in these sediments.
Clay-rich sediments tend to preserve ashes by preventing rapid water and particle
movement. For example, the waterlogged and stagnant clay-rich sediments in the
submerged Epipaleolithic campsite of Ohalo II are reported to contain preserved
ashes (Tsatskin and Nadel 2003).
Charcoal (Fig. 4) is another major by-product of the combustion of plant material.
Unlike ashes, large fragments of charcoal are visible to the naked eye and can be used
to identify burned deposits encountered during excavation. At low and moderate
magnification, charcoal is black in color, opaque in plane-polarized, cross-polarized,
Fig. 4 Charcoal forms as a result of incomplete combustion of
woody tissues. Microphotograph
of charcoal in thin section from
the Neolithic site of Aşıklı
Höyük, Turkey. Visible orientations include cross-sections and
the longitudinal plane; PPL

630

Mentzer

and oblique incident light, and morphologically resembles wood or plant tissue,
although tissues and cells may be distorted. According to geochemical studies, archaeological wood charcoal is composed of carbon exhibiting a graphite-like organized
phase and a nonorganized phase. The proportions of the two phases are determined by
wood species, burning temperature, and diagenesis (Cohen-Ofri et al. 2006).
Under low oxygen conditions, the production of charcoal is favored over ash
(Braadbaart and Poole 2008; Boardman and Jones 1990; Cohen-Ofri et al. 2006;
Wattez 1988). Charcoal also dominates when wood combustion is halted by smothering or dousing with water (Braadbaart and Poole 2008; Wattez 1988). In experimental settings, well-ventilated hearths that are tended to ensure that all fuel reaches
the center of the fire generally produce little charcoal and abundant ashes (Mentzer
and Manne, unpublished data). Thus, one may regard abundant charcoal as evidence
that combustion was less than complete.
The occurrence of charcoal in a feature or scattered within archaeological sites also
depends on the fuel type and preservation conditions as well as the conditions of
combustion (Boardman and Jones 1990; Cohen-Ofri et al. 2006; Théry-Parisot et al.
2010). Like phytoliths, well-preserved whole and sectioned charcoal fragments can
be studied at low magnification to determine which types of plants were selected as
fuel. Nonwoody plants, such as cereals, are composed of different tissues that
carbonize at different rates, according to fire temperature (Boardman and Jones
1990). The burning temperature of wood charcoal of known taxonomy and tissue
density may be estimated using reflectance petrology (Braadbaart and Poole 2008).
Carbon reflectance, (%R) is measured on a resin-impregnated and polished sample
block. If the species is unknown, the structural properties of the sample may be only
generally suggestive of burning temperature since charcoal fragments with wellpreserved wood structures are produced under low temperature (<1,000 °C) conditions (Braadbaart and Poole 2008). Reflectance petrology also distinguishes between
decayed plant material and true charcoal and allows the identification of the charcoal
type. For example, at Sibudu, this technique identified fusinite or inertodetrinite types
of charcoal, which form as a result of incomplete burning (Taylor et al. 1998; Ligouis
2006; Goldberg et al. 2009), as well as secritinite, which possibly forms when plantderived resins are heated (Ligouis 2006).
Charcoal can be susceptible to postdepositional factors. With time, the graphitelike phase of charcoal degrades via oxidation into humic substances, a process that is
accelerated in alkaline environments (Cohen-Ofri et al. 2006). However, relative to
wood ashes, charcoal is more chemically stable under a variety of archaeological
settings. Thus, charcoal can become enriched relative to other combustion byproducts under certain conditions of preservation, resulting in a bias in the interpretation of hearth function (Wattez 1988).
Less common archaeological by-products of burning may include plant-derived
resins and gels (Berna and Goldberg 2008), as well as carbonaceous, phosphatic, or
metallic compounds (Courty et al. 2010). Fuel was not necessarily limited to wood,
even in Paleolithic times. Alternative or supplemental fuels are thought to include
bone (Costamagno et al. 2005; Mentzer 2009; Théry-Parisot 2002; Théry-Parisot et
al. 2005), coal (Théry et al. 1996), and possibly liquid hydrocarbon (Courty et al.
2010) in some cases. In the field, burned bone is identified by colors that range from
black to white, depending on the intensity of burning (Stiner et al. 1995). Importantly,

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

631

Fig. 5 Burned bones in a matrix
of wood ashes from an open-air
context at the Classical Greek
site of Mt. Lykaion range in color
from black (B) to gray (G) in
XPL, indicating both charring
and calcination. One bone fragment (N) is not burned. The
groundmass of this sediment is
comprised of the calcitic fraction
of wood ashes; thin section

burned bone may persist in sediments long after all primary wood ash disintegrates.
In thin section, lightly burned bone (Fig. 5) has an orange color in plane polarized
light (PPL), fully charred bone has a black color in PPL (charred bone), and calcined
bone is colorless in PPL paired with dulled interference colors in XPL (Courty et al.
1989, 2010; Karkanas et al. 2007; Schiegl et al. 2003; Squires et al. 2011). Burned
bone fragments may be associated with a vitreous, vesicular substance termed “bone
char” (Clark and Ligouis 2010; Goldberg et al. 2009) or “fat-derived char” (Miller,
unpublished; Miller et al. 2009). The use of alternative fuels and rare by-products
may be studied using a combination of zooarchaeological and statistical methods
(e.g., Costamagno et al. 2009) or specialized microscopic, molecular, and elemental
techniques, such as coal petrography, X-ray diffraction, and X-ray fluorescence
(XRF) (e.g., Courty et al. 2010). Finally, the use of gas chromatography mass
spectrometry to identify organic residues, including lipids, is more common in
analyses of archaeological ceramics, but also has applications to the study of hearth
sediments (e.g., Kedrowski et al. 2009; March et al. 1989, 1993).
Fig. 6 A fragment of chert
heated under experimental conditions. Heated flints and other
types of fire-cracked rocks are
sometimes used as indirect evidence for burning in archaeological sites. Fire-cracked rock
fragments have also been
reported in thin sections from
archaeological deposits
(Villagran et al. 2011a)

632

Mentzer

Rare compositional elements of combustion features include burned lithic artifacts
or raw materials (Fig. 6), burned food residues (including bone and shell), burned
discarded materials and other “casual fuels” (van der Veen 2007), burned soil
aggregates, and rubified guano. Archaeological interpretations of such inclusions
vary as to the degree intentionally attributed to their presence. Studies of rare hearth
inclusions can nevertheless provide information about hearth function, age, fuel
source, or temperature of burning. Burned lithic artifacts or bones may result from
construction of a hearth atop or near knapping or butchery areas (e.g., Alperson-Afil
et al. 2009; Stiner et al. 1995). Flints heated in this manner may be dated using the
thermoluminescence technique. Construction of a hearth atop a biogenic substrate or
beneath bat or bird roosts can likewise result in the production of rubified guano (e.g.,
Macphail and Goldberg 2000). Microarchaeological studies reveal that the minerals
present in burned guano vary according to the temperature of heating. For example, in
Gorham’s Cave, the chemical state of organic matter within rubified guano found in
association with burned sediments was used to evaluate the maximum temperature
reached within the feature (Macphail and Goldberg 2000). Burned soil or sediment
aggregates, like those found in sites such as Qesem and Sibudu (Karkanas et al. 2007;
Goldberg et al. 2009), likely are produced when mineral matter enters fires with the
fuel (Berna and Goldberg 2008). If radically different in texture or mineralogy from
the geogenic sediments in the site, these aggregates may reveal information about the
source of fuel brought to the site and its type (i.e., shrubby rather than woody
vegetation). Identification of burned seeds can inform archaeologists about the types
of plants growing near the site, the plants exploited as fuel, and in larger quantities,
the plants that were consumed on-site during certain seasons or used for other
purposes (see also Théry-Parisot et al. 2010). Lastly, burned food items may indicate
the use of a fire for cooking (e.g., Gale and Carruthers 2000) or refuse disposal. Study
of these burned materials may reveal information about subsistence and routine
domestic activities that were conducted on-site (van der Veen 2007). Molecular
changes that occur at certain temperatures in several types of food refuse can also
provide additional information about hearth burning conditions. For example, the inorganic mineral component of bone tissue changes its molecular structure at known temperatures (Hiller et al. 2003; Rogers and Daniels 2002; Shipman et al. 1984), a
phenomenon that has been exploited in archaeological samples from sites, such as
Kebara Cave, Wonderwerk Cave, and Pech de l’Azé IV, to reconstruct temperature
and degree of bone burning (e.g., Berna and Goldberg 2008; Berna et al. 2012;
Dibble et al. 2009) (Fig. 7). Likewise, experimental studies indicate that the degree of
calcination of burned mollusk shells and the presence of altered morphological
features provide information about temperature of heating (Godino et al. 2011;
Villagran et al. 2011a, b).

The Identification of Burning in the Archaeological Record
Intact Combustion Structures
In archaeological excavation, the presence of three primary components—rubified
sediment or fire-cracked rock, charcoal, and ash—is used to identify intact combustion

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

633

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08

Absorbance

0.06
0.04
0.02

200oC
0.00

400oC

-0.02

600oC

-0.04

700oC
-0.06

800oC
2200

2000

1800

1600
1400
1200
Wavenumbers (cm-1)

1000

800

600

Fig. 7 Infrared analyses of burned bones yield information about burning temperature. Here, attenuated
total reflectance FTIR spectra of bones heated at different temperatures exhibit characteristic peaks (see also
Thompson et al. 2009). At 600 °C, peaks at 1,088 and 631 cm−1 appear. Experimental sample of pig bone
(Sus scrofa) heated in a kiln and ground following a standardized procedure after Surovell and Stiner (2001)

structures or hearths (Fig. 8). The quantities of these three materials vary, depending
on the nature of the substrate, the environment and duration of combustion, and the
postdepositional alteration. The latter two materials, as discussed above, are direct byproducts of burning, while rubified sediment or cracked rock are a consequence of
substrate composition and exposure to heat.
Detailed and numerous macroscale and microscale descriptions of typical hearths
come from the exceptionally well-studied site of Kebara Cave (Albert et al. 2012;
Bar-Yosef et al. 1992; Goldberg 2001; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Meignen et al.
2001, 2007; Schiegl et al. 1996). In Kebara, Middle Paleolithic combustion structures
are generally lenticular in cross-section and located atop a flat or concave surface.
When a geogenic substrate is present, the sediment is burned and rubified (Meignen
et al. 2001, 2007; Schiegl et al. 1996). Charcoal-rich layers (3–5 cm in thickness) are
generally found at the base of each individual feature, while ash-rich layers (5–15 cm
thickness) are present at the top (Albert et al. 2012; Meignen et al. 2001, 2007). In
thin section, the charcoal layers are composed of a mixture of charcoal and ash, while
the ash layers are composed of rhombic micrite and phytoliths exhibiting variable
states of preservation (discussed further in the succeeding paragraphs). In addition,
many features contain multiple superimposed and paired layers of charcoal overlain
by ash, resulting from several phases of reuse of the space (Meignen et al. 2001,
2007). Although single charcoal–ash couplets are typically interpreted as the remnants of one burning event (Goldberg and Sherwood 2006), some combustion
structures in Kebara Cave contain very thick layers of ashes (up to 45 cm) above a
comparably thick layer of charcoal. Meignen et al. (2007) interpret these features as
evidence for multiple burning events within one feature.

634

Mentzer

Fig. 8 A sequence of rubified sediment overlain by charcoal and ash visible in profile is indicative of an
intact combustion structure (unprepared or lenticular substrate). Prehistoric archaeological sites contain
many different types of combustion features that differ in morphology and composition from the typical
structure illustrated in a. Depending on the composition of the substrate and the degree of burning, single
events can produce combustion structures composed of rubified sediment overlain by charcoal and ash (a),
charcoal overlain by ash (b), pure ash (c), or rubified sediment overlain by ash (not pictured). Multiple
burning events in the same location result in stacked features containing superimposed lenses of rubified
sediment, charcoal, and ash (b, e, h) or combinations thereof. Hearth cleaning activities produce ash
dumping features that vary in composition from pure ash (i) to ash mixed with charcoal (f) to a mixture of
ash, charcoal, and sediment (c). The identification of these features in the field is further complicated by
postdepositional processes. Distinguishing between a laterally reworked or bioturbated stack of ashy
hearths (h) and a dumped ash feature (i), for example, can be difficult in the field, as large pseudocarbonized plant structures and preserved plant tissues unique to (h) and high porosity more typical of (i) can only
be observed at microscale

The typical sequence of rubified earth overlain by charcoal and ash has been replicated
in some burning experiments (Miller et al. 2009; Wattez 1992). In partnership with
microscopic confirmation of burned materials, this sequence has become the fossil
directeur for a hearth. Hearths of this type have been documented in numerous
archaeological sites ranging in age from Middle Paleolithic to recent (e.g., BarYosef et al. 1992; Goldberg 2003; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Goldberg et al.
2009, 2012; Homsey and Capo 2006; Karkanas 2001; Karkanas and Goldberg 2010;
Macphail and Goldberg 2000; Mallol et al. 2010; Meignen et al. 2001; Rigaud et al.
1995; Wadley 2012; Wattez 1994; see also Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6). In some sites,
rubified earth, charcoal, and ashes have been documented only in macroscale but are
consistent with features that have been studied using microscopic techniques (e.g.,
Akazawa and Sakaguchi 1987). In other cases, the absence of these three materials
in sequence, or in any context, has been used to argue against intentional combustion
at certain archaeological sites (e.g., Zhoukoudian Cave; Goldberg et al. 2001; Weiner

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

635

Table 3 Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age (Pleistocene) sites with evidence for combustion
confirmed by micromorphological analyses
Site

Location

References

Spain

Courty et al. 2010; Pastó et al. 2000;
Vallverdú et al. 2005

Type 1: Intact hearths
Abric Romani (rockshelter)
Gorham’s Cave

Spain

Macphail and Goldberg 2000

Grotte XVI (cave)

France

Karkanas et al. 2002; Rigaud et al. 1995

Hayonim Cave

Israel

Goldberg 1979; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998

Kebara Cave

Israel

Albert et al. 2000; Bar-Yosef et al. 1992;
Berna and Goldberg 2008;
Meignen et al. 1989, 2001, 2007
Karkanas et al. 2004

Klissoura Cave

Greece

Lakonis Cave

Greece

Karkanas 2002

Melikane Shelter

Lesotho

Stewart et al. 2012

Pech de l’Azé IV (cave)

France

Dibble et al. 2009; Goldberg and Berna 2010

Pinnacle Point site PP13B (cave)

South Africa

Karkanas and Goldberg 2010

Qafzeh (Cave)

Israel

Berna and Goldberg 2008

Roc de Marsal (cave)

France

Goldberg et al. 2012

Sibudu (rockshelter)

South Africa

Goldberg et al. 2009; Schiegl and Conard 2006

Üçağızlı II Cave

Turkey

Mentzer 2011

Vanguard Cave

Spain

Macphail and Goldberg 2000

Type 2: Reworked combustion materials
(A) Anthropogenic reworking
Kebara Cave

Israel

Bar-Yosef et al. 1992; Goldberg 2001;
Meignen et al. 2007

La Quina (rockshelter)

France

Mentzer, unpublished personal observation

Lakonis Cave

Greece

Elefanti et al. 2008

Pech de l’Azé IV (cave)

France

Dibble et al. 2009; Goldberg et al. 2012

Sibudu Rockshelter

South Africa

Goldberg et al. 2009

(B) Bioturbation
Amud Cave

Israel

Madella et al. 2002

Grotte XVI (cave)

France

Rigaud et al. 1995

Hayonim Cave

Israel

Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998

Kebara Cave

Israel

Meignen et al. 2007

Sibudu (rockshelter)

South Africa

Goldberg et al. 2009

Tabun Cave

Israel

Albert et al. 1999

Üçağızlı II Cave

Turkey

Mentzer 2011

(C) Natural reworking (e.g., transport by water or wind, cryoturbation or pedoturbation)
Die Kelders Cave

South Africa

Esquilleu Cave

Spain

Goldberg 2000
Mallol et al. 2010

Hohle Fels Cave

Germany

Goldberg et al. 2003; Miller, unpublished

Kebara Cave

Israel

Goldberg 2001

Obi-Rakhmat (rockshelter)

Uzbekistan

Mallol et al. 2009

636

Mentzer

Table 3 (continued)
Site

Location

References

Tabun Cave

Israel

Albert et al. 1999

Vanguard Cave

Spain

Macphail and Goldberg 2000

Israel

Berna and Goldberg 2008

(D) Unspecified reworking
Qafzeh Cave
Type 3: Presence of combustion
Pinnacle Point site PP13B (cave)

South Africa

Karkanas and Goldberg 2010

Tabun Cave

Israel

Albert et al. 1999

et al. 1998) or in favor of postdepositional modifications of the burned materials (see
also Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6).
Of the three materials typical of intact hearths, the basal rubified sediment layer is
most variable in its expression. “Oxidation of iron minerals” is an oft-cited cause of
substrate rubification. According to Canti and Linford (2000) who described this
process, brown- or yellow-colored iron oxide minerals, such as goethite, are typically
present in sediments. Upon heating, these minerals transform to hematite, which is
bright red in color. However, under certain burning conditions, iron oxides transform to
other minerals. For example, under reducing conditions, brown or black maghemite can
form. In addition, some substrates are composed of sediments or materials that do not
contain iron. These substrates are theoretically unlikely to rubify upon heating.
Canti and Linford (2000) explored the process of sediment rubification and the
effects of in situ burning on different types of substrates. They reviewed previously
published experiments and observations of natural fires and found that, at several
centimeters depth within an assortment of substrates, temperatures varied widely (from
∼100 to ∼500 °C), depending on the composition of the substrate and the duration of
burning. In their own subsequent experiments, Canti and Linford documented substrate
temperatures of more than 400 °C beneath fires exceeding 800 °C. Despite these high
temperatures, only one of the three different test substrates exhibited rubification upon
cooling. Within this substrate, Canti and Linford observed that the thickness of the red
zone remained the same no matter the duration of burning (ranging from 6 h to 4 days).
They hypothesize that rubification occurs only in sediments of a certain composition
(determined in particular by the minerals present, organic material, and moisture content).
However, when compositional requirements are met, the color change can be quite
dramatic. Other experimental studies yield contradictory results. For example, following
replication of the various types of prepared and unprepared burning surfaces at the site of
Pincevent, March et al. (2010) observed visible differences in the rubified and
blackened substrates, including a relationship between the thickness of the rubified
zone and the duration of burning. Actualistic studies of prepared burning surfaces
conducted by Homsey and Sherwood (2010) documented shifts in color in cave
sediments following mixture with water and firing. In their experiments, four of five
surfaces became darker and redder, while the fifth became lighter in color with no
rubification. The archaeological significance of these findings is that reddening is

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

637

Table 4 Upper Paleolithic (Pleistocene) sites with evidence for combustion confirmed by micromorphological analyses
Site

Location

References

Abric Romani (rockshelter)

Spain

Vallverdú 2002

Etoilles

France

Wattez 1994

Gorham’s Cave

Spain

Macphail and Goldberg 2000

Kebara Cave

Israel

Bar-Yosef et al. 1992

Klissoura Cave

Greece

Karkanas 2010; Karkanas et al. 2004

Pincevent

France

Wattez 1994

Type 1: Intact hearths

Theopetra (cave)

Greece

Karkanas 2001

Üçağızlı I Cave

Turkey

Goldberg 2003; Mentzer 2011

Verberie

France

Wattez 1994

Type 2: Reworked combustion materials
(A) Anthropogenic reworking
Hohle Fels Cave

Germany

Goldberg et al. 2003; Miller, unpublished;
Schiegl et al. 2003

Kebara Cave

Israel

Meignen et al. 2007

Klissoura Cave

Greece

Karkanas 2010

Üçağızlı I Cave

Turkey

Goldberg 2003; Mentzer 2011

Gorham’s Cave

Spain

Macphail and Goldberg 2000

Klissoura Cave

Greece

Karkanas 2010

Üçağızlı I Cave

Turkey

Goldberg 2003; Mentzer 2011

Verberie

France

Wattez 1994

(B) Bioturbation

(C) Natural reworking (e.g., transport by water or wind, cryoturbation or pedoturbation)
Etoilles

France

Wattez 1994

Hohle Fels Cave

Germany

Miller, unpublished

Kebara Cave

Israel

Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998

Pincevent

France

Wattez 1994

Theopetra (cave)

Greece

Karkanas 2001

Üçağızlı I Cave

Turkey

Goldberg 2003; Mentzer 2011

(D) Unspecified reworking
Geißenklösterle (cave)

Germany

Goldberg and Berna 2010; Miller, unpublished

Klissoura Cave

Greece

Karkanas et al. 2004

Micromorphological studies of Upper Paleolithic combustion features are not conducted as frequently as at
Middle Paleolithic sites, perhaps due to the identification of hearths in these sites (e.g., the Abri Pataud)
using visibly prepared substrates or rock linings that are readily observable in the field

dependent on both substrate composition and burning conditions and that the thickness of the rubified zone cannot be consistently correlated with hearth function.
At microscale, rubification and other heat-induced alterations to the substrate are
also variable. According to experiments conducted by Wattez (1992), microscopic
features, such as cracking of sedimentary aggregates and rock fragments, and

638

Mentzer

Table 5 Later Stone Age, Epipaleolithic, Natufian, Mesolithic, Paleoindian, and Archaic (Paleoamerican)
sites with evidence for combustion confirmed by micromorphological analyses (these types of sites are
generally Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene in age)
Site

Location

References

Dust Cave

USA

Homsey and Capo 2006; Sherwood 2001, 2008;
Sherwood and Chapman 2005

Mesolithic Site 16-D-4

Sudan

Zerboni 2011

Mesolithic Site 16-D-5

Sudan

Zerboni 2011

Type 1: Intact hearths

Type 2: Reworked combustion materials
(A) Anthropogenic reworking
Dust Cave

USA

Homsey and Capo 2006; Sherwood 2001, 2008

Lapa das Bolieras (rockshelter)

Brazil

Araujo et al. 2008

Mesolithic Site 16-D-4

Sudan

Zerboni 2011

USA

Sherwood 2001, 2008

(B) Bioturbation
Dust Cave
Kitulgala Beli-lena (rockshelter)

Sri Lanka

Kourampas et al. 2009

Lapa das Bolieras (rockshelter)

Brazil

Araujo et al. 2008

Mesolithic Site 16-D-5

Sudan

Zerboni 2011

(C) Natural reworking (e.g. transport by water or wind, cryoturbation or pedoturbation)
Dust Cave

USA

Kitulgala Beli-lena (rockshelter)

Sri Lanka

Sherwood 2001
Kourampas et al. 2009

Lapa das Bolieras (rockshelter)

Brazil

Araujo et al. 2008

USA

Mentzer, unpublished data

Type 3: Presence of combustion
Sierra Diablo Cave

masking of clay birefringence occur only beneath moderate-intensity fires (350–500 °C).
Rubification and development of a granular microstructure occur as a result of highintensity fires (>500 °C). These features may or may not be present in archaeological
sites. Mallol et al. (2007) reported both masked and higher clay birefringence beneath
ethnographic fires, the former attributable to the presence of finely divided charcoal
mixed into the sediment. Moreover, they also observed that hearth substrates that
appeared rubified in the field were either indistinguishable from natural soils or only
slightly rubified in thin section.
Finally, the identification of heat-induced rubification is controversial due to other
processes that can produce red deposits within sites. For example, in Pech de l’Azé
IV Layer 8, rubified sediments are present; however, Dibble et al. (2009) are cautious
in their interpretation of these materials as burned due to the presence of hematite in
unburned sediments within the cave. In the nearby site of Pech de l’Azé II, as well as
the sites of Üçağızlı I and Zhoukoudian, red sediments naturally occur in deposits
above the cave entrances (Goldberg 1979, 2003; Goldberg et al. 2001) and colluvial
processes may contribute to their incorporation into the archaeological deposits.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

639

Table 6 Ethnoarchaeological and experimental studies of combustion features paired with micromorphological analyses.
Site

Location

References

Type 1: Intact hearths
Experimental wood fires

France

Wattez 1988

Experimental wood fires

Germany

Miller et al. 2009

Experimental wood fires

Argentina

Godino et al. 2011;
Villagran et al. 2011b

Experimental burned bedding

South Africa

Miller and Sievers 2012

Hadza village fires

Tanzania

Mallol et al. 2007

Maasai village fires

Kenya

Shahack-Gross et al. 2004

Yamana fires associated with shellfish processing
and consumption

Argentina

Villagran et al. 2011a

Experimental dumped and trampled deposits

Germany

Miller et al. 2009

Yamana fires associated with shellfish processing
and consumption

Argentina

Godino et al. 2011;
Villagran et al. 2011a

Argentina

Godino et al. 2011;
Villagran et al. 2011a

Experimental ash production of different fuels
at various temperatures using a muffle furnace

Iceland

Simpson et al. 2003

Experimental heating and petrography of shells
and whale bone

Argentina

Godino et al. 2011;
Villagran et al. 2011a, b

Type 2: Reworked combustion materials
(A) Anthropogenic reworking

(B) Bioturbation
Yamana fires associated with shellfish processing
and consumption
Type 3: Presence of combustion

Lastly, rubified layers of postdepositional chemical origin have been documented at
Grotte XVI (Karkanas 2010; Karkanas et al. 1999, 2002).
In some sites, an alternative to the basal rubified substrate is an intentionally
prepared combustion surface or hearth lining. Middle Paleolithic hearths are typically
built atop unmodified surfaces, although the shallow lenticular profiles observed in
Mousterian layers of Kebara Cave may be indicative of limited surface preparation
(Meignen et al. 2001, 2007). However, Mallol et al. (2007) observed that a similar
profile results from ash removal during hearth maintenance. In the Middle Paleolithic
of Europe, hearth preparation is likewise limited to the construction of a lenticular
basin or exploitation of naturally flat or basin-shaped surfaces (e.g., Abric Romani;
Pastó et al. 2000; Vallverdú et al. 2012). Abric Romani levels J and K contain the
only examples of block-lined Middle Paleolithic hearths (Pastó et al. 2000) and levels
J and O contain features interpreted as prepared hearth substrates (Courty et al. 2010).
In the Middle Stone Age rockshelter site of Sibudu, hearths are constructed atop flat
or concave surfaces or on roof block surfaces (Wadley 2010). Rock-lined or paved
hearths (a.k.a. fireplaces) appear regularly in the Eurasian Upper Paleolithic and

640

Mentzer

become especially common in later periods. These features allow the ready identification of burning areas in open-air sites such as Kostenki (Grigor’ev 1993), where
other combustion by-products are not consistently preserved.
Manufactured hearth substrates are very rare in the Paleolithic but common in
some later periods. Paleolithic examples are reported in the Aurignacian layers of
Klissoura Cave, where dozens of hearths are lined with red clay that was collected
and brought into the site (Karkanas et al. 2004). The clay linings were hardened by
the fires built within them or by embers that were transferred into them from other
fireplaces. Early prepared clay burning surfaces are reported in the Americas at
Monte Verde (Quivira and Dillehay 1988) and at the Archaic sites of Ice House
Bottom and Dust Cave, the latter studied at high resolution using micromorphology
(Sherwood 2001, 2008; Sherwood and Chapman 2005). These features exhibit
compositions and textures that distinguish them from the natural substrates in the
archaeological layers of the same sites. In Dust Cave, the hardness of the clay appears
to correlate with the temperature of the fire or the duration of burning, factors that
may relate to the function of the combustion feature. Textile impressions and very
thin ash crusts on the clay surfaces provide additional information on the mode of
preparation and sweeping after or during use (Sherwood and Chapman 2005).
Micromorphological studies of the layers of charcoal and ash within hearths have
also revealed variability in thickness and expression due to burning conditions and
combustion-related activities. Experimental studies have produced different types of
sequences. Burning experiments conducted by Miller et al. (2009) produced typical
clear sequences of rubified sediment overlain by charcoal and ash. On the other hand,
Wattez (1992) documented some variability in the morphology and color of the
charcoal and ash layers that formed in experimental fires. This variability occurred
as a function of burning intensity. In her experiments, moderate-intensity fires
produced basal layers of carbonized organic material overlain by upper layers of
charcoal mixed with ash, while high-intensity fires produced upper layers composed
of pure ash.
Charcoal is not the only source of black material in archaeological sediments.
Although combustion structures at some sites exhibit blackened basal layers, micromorphology reveals that these layers contain fine sediment that is enriched in plantderived organic material (Mallol et al. 2007; Goldberg et al. 2012) or organic material
mixed with blackened bone (Dibble et al. 2009). At Pinnacle Point site PP13B,
Karkanas and Goldberg (2010) observe some black layers that contain charcoal and
burned bones, while others contain only humified organic material. Finally, as
described above, burning under reducing conditions can lead to the formation of
brown or black iron-bearing minerals that in the field may be confused with charcoal.
Other studies suggest that the charcoal layers in hearths may be thin or, in some
cases, absent. In Hayonim Cave, for example, some combustion structures are
composed of bedded ashes atop bedded ashes mixed with burned terra rossa (Berna
and Goldberg 2008, Fig. 2d). In Klissoura Cave, some Upper Paleolithic clay-lined
hearths contain only ash (Karkanas 2010). At Pech de l’Azé IV, clear charcoal layers
were not observed within the portions of the Layer 8 combustion sequence that were
analyzed using micromorphology, despite the fact that charcoal layers were encountered during excavation and charcoal samples were analyzed using paleobotanical
methods (Dibble et al. 2009). In ethnographic settings, development of charcoal beds

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

641

beneath ash is also inconsistent. Mallol et al. (2007) reported that intact Hadza
hearths contain only ashes mixed with variably carbonized materials exhibiting
preserved cellular structures. Some archaeological sites contain exceptionally thick
ash layers over comparatively thin layers of charcoal. Karkanas et al. (2004, 2007)
speculated that such thick ash layers can form from the continuous use of fires,
especially when coupled with low geogenic sedimentation rates. Based on experimental calculations, the substantial ash deposits that are present in some Near Eastern
sites could form as a result of several years of continuous combustion of wood
(Schiegl et al. 1996).
When rubified sediments and charcoal layers are absent, other characteristics present
within ashes can confirm that combustion structures are intact. In Kebara Cave, for
example, Meignen et al. (2001) used fragile layers of unbroken phytoliths within
thick combustion sequences to identify individual structures that were not reworked.
Stewart et al. (2012) also reported ashy deposits containing articulated phytoliths and
intact leaf structures in the Middle Stone Age site of Melikane Rockshelter. Karkanas
et al. (2007, p. 208) likewise used the “wavy internal fabric” of certain ash lenses in
Qesem Cave to further support stratigraphic indications that they are intact. In Hadza
hearths, Mallol et al. (2007) observed aligned clay intercalations within the intact ash
layers, which they interpreted as undisturbed clays that were present within the plants
prior to burning (Mallol et al. 2007, Fig. 10b). Other features present in intact ash
layers include materials that Wattez (1988, p. 361 and Fig. 11) described as “residues
brun noir” or “residues gris.” These materials, which exhibit morphologies consistent
with plant tissue in thin section, preserve a stage of combustion during which charcoal
is incompletely converted to ash. Mallol et al. (2007, pp. 2038–2039) described this
stage of plant burning as “pseudocarbonization,” and the features visible in thin
section as “pseudocarbonized wood.” In consideration of the fact that the term
“pseudocarbonized” is misleading as to the dual calcitic and carbonized composition
of the material, it is proposed here that the phrase “partially carbonized tissues” be
used to describe such features in the future. In Dust Cave, plant tissue pseudomorphs
are composed entirely of ash and are termed “articulated ash” (Sherwood 2001, p.
130; 2008). Like the pseudocarbonized wood structures of Mallol et al., these
features can exhibit the original fabric of the wood tissues. Courty et al. (1989, Figs.
34 and 35) observed similar structures in layer 9 of Grotte Vaufrey and interpreted them
as burned fragments of plant stems or leaves. Here, these features will be described as
“articulated ashes,” a phrase modified from Sherwood (2001, 2008) that acknowledges
the presence of multiple micritic crystal aggregates in anatomical position.
Articulated ashes and partially carbonized tissues generated under experimental
conditions (Fig. 9) are exceptionally fragile. These features are thus ideal for assessing the preservation of ash layers. Mallol et al. (2007) observe “pseudocarbonized
wood,” “ash bundles,” and “carbonized and calcitic cells in anatomical position” in
thin sections of intact Hadza hearths. In one hearth, they state that preservation is
“excellent, as shown by the undisturbed position of the plant cells in the ash” (Mallol
et al. 2007, p. 2041). These observations extend to archaeological settings. Homsey
and Capo (2006) state that, in Dust Cave hearths, “calcitic pseudomorphs indicate
minimal transport or disturbance.” Shahack-Gross et al. (2008, Fig. 6c) document
“pseudomorphic cellular structures after woody tissue” that are present in cemented and
laminated ash deposits at Amud Cave, later interpreted as intact hearths. Karkanas

642

Mentzer

Fig. 9 Articulated ashes and carbonized tissues are indicative of intact ash deposits. a Photograph of two
partially burned Chilean mesquite (P. chilensis) sticks that exhibit exceptionally fragile structures composed
of charcoal, intermediate “pseudocarbonized”(sensu Mallol et al. 2007) or partially carbonized phases, and
calcitic ash. b Photomicrograph of a grain mount of the partially carbonized phase from the lower stick;
XPL. c Photomicrograph of a grain mount of articulated ashes from the upper stick. Informal agitation
studies suggest that these multimillimeter structures would not frequently survive hearth sweeping or
dumping episodes unless ash layers were previously cemented. Further work must be done to quantify these
effects; XPL. d Articulated ashes and partially carbonized tissues in a thin section from a variably cemented
ash layer in the archaeological site of Üçağızlı I; XPL. e Reworked and cemented articulated ashes and
partially carbonized tissues in a thin section from the site of Üçağızlı II. The rounded edges of this sandsized fragment are indicative of mechanical abrasion. The surrounding matrix is ashy material mixed with
geogenic materials; XPL

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

643

(2010, Fig. 10) identifies “calcitic cellular pseudomorphs after plant tissues” in
hearths in Klissoura Cave. Finally, these features are present in two early sites with
evidence for burning. In situ ash lenses at Qesem Cave contain articulated ashes and
partially carbonized tissues (Karkanas et al. 2007, Figs. 5b, 10, and 12b); not
surprisingly, intact hearths are rare in relation to disturbed ash deposits in this early
site. The ash deposits at Wonderwerk Cave also contain “ashed plant material” (Berna
et al. 2012, Fig. 3). In sum, although archaeological, experimental, and ethnographic
studies demonstrate that intact hearths are compositionally variable, many different
types of microscopic features may be used to assess their degree of preservation.
Other microscopic features suggest partial erosion or alteration of otherwise intact
structures. The most common types of alteration features, especially prevalent in
caves, include discontinuous layers or secondary minerals formed in situ (Goldberg
2000). In Pinnacle Point site PP13B, Karkanas and Goldberg (2010) interpret layers
of burned bone and charcoal without overlying ash as intact combustion structures. In
this locality, secondary carbonate recrystallization and dissolution have negatively
impacted the preservation of ashes. Similar sequences are present in Sibudu, although, here, ashes are sometimes locally preserved (Goldberg et al. 2009). At this
site, charcoal layers are exceptionally thick, while rubified substrates are also present,
but very thin. In Melikane Rockshelter, ashes are partially dissolved and locally
recrystallized; however, articulated phytoliths observed within burned features suggests that they are intact (Stewart et al. 2012). The causes and types of postdepositional dissolution processes implicated by such sequences are discussed further in the
succeeding paragraphs.
Reworked Combustion Materials
Some sites contain burned materials in secondary position (“type 2” of Tables 3, 4, 5,
and 6). These materials indicate that burning likely took place somewhere within the
site, either within a documented intact structure or elsewhere. The site of Tabun
highlights the necessity of using microarchaeological techniques to assess the integrity of combustion features. In Tabun Level C, features composed of alternating
layers of black, brown, and white sediment. At <50 cm diameter, these features
resemble hearths in cross-section, but features visible at microscale indicate reworking to a degree that the original depositional mechanism is unknown (Albert et al.
1999). These results suggest that the presence of multicolored laminations in the field
is not unambiguous evidence for intact hearths. Reworking of burned materials can
range from movement on the order of millimeters to multiple meters and can occur as
a result of geological processes, animal activity, or human activity. The macroscopic
and micromorphological identification of naturally or biologically reworked deposits
is discussed here, while case studies, in particular those concerning human modification during combustion-related activities, are detailed in later sections.
In the field, reworked combustion materials are identified primarily by the
absence of the tripartite sequence of rubified sediment, charcoal, and ash
described above, as well as by the mixing of burned and unburned materials
(Fig. 10a; Schiegl et al. 2003). Other features indicative of reworking are visible only
at the microscale (Fig. 10b). These include rounding or mechanical abrasion of
burned materials or sedimentary fabrics such as laminations, long-axis alignment,

644

Mentzer

Fig. 10 Reworking by natural processes. a Reworked burned materials in a thin section from the Ahmarian
layers at Üçağızlı I. This deposit contains rounded, reworked aggregates of geogenic materials, including
red clay and silt (R) and cemented red clay and silt (Rc) mixed with materials sourced from combustion
structures, including charcoal (Ch), and aggregates of ashes (A), one of which contains a fragment of bone
(b) and partially carbonized wood tissue (p). The matrix of this sample is partially cemented red silt and
clay mixed with wood ashes. Macroscale features of the layer are indicative of colluvial transport; XPL. b
Reworked fragment of charcoal within a thin section from a water-lain deposit at the site of La Quina. The
matrix is sorted and laminated quartz, carbonate, and glauconite sands sourced from the local limestone
bedrock; PPL

and textural sorting, including microscopic graded bedding. Laminated burned materials have been reported from the site of Lapa das Bolieras, where they are interpreted
as secondary reworking by water (Araujo et al. 2008). In Kebara Cave, sorted and
rounded fragments of charcoal are present within laminated and sandy deposits
(Goldberg 2001). In the field, such features are often termed “stringers.” Stringers
can be indicative of reworking by water or wind. Stringers of burned bone and/or
charcoal have been identified within Die Kelders Layer 7 (Goldberg 2000). In Dust
Cave, stringers of charcoal are sorted and graded. These textural features, in combination with ash depletion, suggest reworking by water (Homsey and Capo 2006;
Sherwood 2001). Slight reworking of burned materials by low-energy water movement has also been documented experimentally by Villagran et al. (2011b) and at the
Paleolithic sites of Etiolles and Pincevent (Wattez 1994). In the sites of Obi-Rakhmat
and Esquilleau Cave, reworking of burned materials by local spring water is additionally evidenced by visible redoximorphic features and clotted calcite (Mallol et al.
2009, 2010).
Other natural postdepositional reworking processes that impact hearths include
colluvial movement, cryoturbation, and pedoturbation. Colluvial deposits are distinguished from water- or wind-lain sediments by their heterogeneous compositions,
erosive lower boundaries, and lack of textural sorting (see also Fig. 10a). In some
depositional environments, colluvial reworking is also evidenced by grain rounding
and coating (Miller, unpublished). Colluvial reworking of burned materials is a
common occurrence throughout the sequence at Üçağızlı Cave I (Mentzer 2011).
Within the Üçağızlı I deposits, colluvial layers in places truncate intact hearths and
contain rounded aggregates of cemented ashes mixed with geogenic sediments.
Cryoturbated sediments are identified in thin section by several characteristic
features. These include aggregated microstructures in which coarse materials are
coated by clay and silt, platy microstructures, or postdepositional porosity increases

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

645

relative to the original deposit, depending on the sediment texture. Cryoturbated
combustion features have been identified at the sites of Hohle Fels and Esquilleau
Cave. In Hohle Fels, cryoturbated layers are identified by the presence of coated bone
fragments and rounded, sand- and silt-sized fragments of burned bone mixed with a
small amount of ashes (Goldberg et al. 2003; Miller, unpublished; Schiegl et al.
2003). In Esquilleau Cave, Mallol et al. (2010) describe deposits that have been
reworked by a combination of cryoturbation, spring activity, and carnivores.
Some postdepositional movements obscure the original fabrics but do not significantly impact the position of materials. For example, mild gravitational settling of
fine burned materials is present in the thin sections of features from Pech de l’Azé IV
with postdepositional movement occurring over distances of millimeters to centimeters (Dibble et al. 2009). In addition, Mallol et al. (2007) report that the dominant
types of voids in well-preserved, intact hearths are packing voids, which are empty
spaces between particles. Therefore, the presence of larger voids or higher sediment
porosity within archaeological hearths may be indicative of some postdepositional
disturbance. Sherwood (2008, p. 37) terms materials that have been reworked within
the original locality of combustion as “mixed burned deposits.”
Fine-scale, local reworking can also arise from the movements or feeding activities
of insects and other small animals (Fig. 11). These processes have impacted combustion features at many archaeological sites. Bioturbation has locally dispersed
burned materials in Amud Cave (Madella et al. 2002). At Verberie, postdepositional
bioturbation resulted in excremental fabrics, fragmentation of burned materials,
homogenization of formerly layered combustion by-products, and mixing of burned
anthropogenic materials with natural materials (Wattez 1994). In Tabun Cave level C,
bioturbation has resulted in channels, pellets, and very localized mixing of combustion materials (Albert et al. 1999). In Üçağızlı I Cave, insect activity has differentially
impacted the ash and charcoal layers of intact, stacked combustion structures. While
ash layers preserve internal laminated fabrics and contain articulated ashes and
partially carbonized tissues, the charcoal layers exhibit crumb structures and high
porosities that are indicative of postdepositional reworking. Identification of these

Fig. 11 A bioturbated anthropogenic layer from the site of
Üçağızlı I contains welded,
pellet-shaped microaggregates of
ashes mixed with geogenic red
clay and silt. The overall porosity
is higher than intact ash layers,
laminations are absent, and fragile structures such as partially
carbonized tissues or articulated
ashes are not preserved. Thin
section, PPL

646

Mentzer

features as intact relies entirely on the microscopic characteristics of the ashes
(Mentzer 2011).
Bioturbation may also cause extensive homogenization of burned materials. Mixing due to carnivore activity (e.g., the aforementioned deposits at Esquilleu Cave;
Mallol et al. 2010) can be identified in the field and thin section by the presence of
coprolites and digested bone fragments. Smaller mammals produce burrows as well
as homogenized deposits. Infilled burrows may be visible in excavation profiles or
identified in thin section by higher sedimentary porosity. Insects feed on organic
material present in the sediment, as well as on other insects. Intense insect activity
related to feeding can result in the obliteration of all primary depositional fabrics, an
increase in porosity, and the development of a strong crumb to spongy microstructure.
In the site of Üçağızlı II, a combination of insect and rodent bioturbation has
obliterated all primary combustion features in the eastern half of the excavation
trench, while in Üçağızlı I, insect activity within suspected ash dumps or middens
prevents further archaeological interpretation (Mentzer 2011). Studies of intact
hearths at both sites indicate that bioturbation by all types of organisms is hindered
by postdepositional cementation.
Indirect Evidence for Burning
Finally, some archaeological sites or layers contain isolated burned materials; however, the exact locality of burning and relationship to human activity are unknown. At
the macroscale, burned bones and heated lithic artifacts are the most recognizable
indirect evidence for burning, although other rare types of burned materials have been
documented (e.g., Vandiver et al. 1989). In one case study, Stiner et al. (2011) used
the frequency and intensity of burned bones to identify the presence and horizontal
distribution of combustion activities in the lowermost layers of Qesem Cave, where
intact structures or preserved ash are lacking. A similar approach was utilized at the
sites of Wallertheim A and Tönchesberg 2B (Conard et al. 1998; Adler et al. 2003).
Likewise, Goren-Inbar et al. (2004) and Dibble et al. (2009) consider burned flints to
be usable proxies for combustion at sites when postdepositional conditions may have
negatively impacted the preservation of hearths (c.f. Roebroeks and Villa 2011). In
the site of Pech de l’Azé IV, for example, intact and semi-intact combustion structures
are present only in the lowest layers of the site in association with burned lithic
materials. Above Layer 8, burned flints are present but decrease significantly in
abundance towards the top of the archaeological sequence. Sandgathe et al. (2011)
interpret this trend as evidence for a lack of hearths in the upper portion of the
sequence. In some cases, chert may be intentionally heated in order to influence its
fracture properties. Therefore, it may be possible to determine if the heating of the
flints occurred at the site by identifying the stage in the reduction sequence of the
heated materials. If only finished tools or blanks show evidence of heating, it could be
argued that heating was intentional and that heat-treated artifacts were preferentially
transported to the site. On the other hand, if unmodified waste flakes removed during
the early stages of the reduction sequence have been heat-altered, the alteration is
likely to have occurred in the vicinity of the knapping area. Refitting of burned and
nonburned lithic materials may also indicate that heating occurred following knapping on site. Other macroscale heated materials that may be recovered out of primary

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

647

context include isolated burned bones, heat-treated wood tools, fragments of charcoal, and faunal and heated rock assemblages associated with grease-rendering.
In thin section, indirect evidence for burning at or near an archaeological site most
commonly occurs as microscopic fragments of charcoal (e.g., Angelucci 2003;
Boschian 1997; Kourampas et al. 2009). In Tabun Cave Level B, charcoal present
within terra rossa-derived sediments suggests that burning took place at the site
during their deposition (Albert et al. 1999). However, microscopic charcoal fragments can enter archaeological sites and other types of deposits following nonanthropogenic burning events, such as forest fires (see, for example, Goldberg et
al. 2001; Théry-Parisot et al. 2010). Heated debitage or bedrock fragments may also
be identified in thin section. Under magnification, heated chert is identified by the
presence of microfractures (Angelucci 2003). Similarly heated fragments of limestone bedrock may develop shrinkage cracks and reaction rims when exposed to
water after burning (Karkanas 2007). Other lines of indirect evidence for combustion
in thin section include burned bones or burned shell in otherwise unburned sediments
(Angelucci 2003; Karkanas and Goldberg 2010). Rubified sediments, as discussed
above, are ambiguous indicators of burning but are sometimes cited as indirect
evidence of burning. These arguments may be compelling when the color, structure,
or optical properties of the rubified sediments are significantly different from the
natural sediment (Angelucci 2003; Courty et al. 1989; Wattez 1992). For example, in
Kebara Cave, reworked aggregates of rubified terra rossa are distinguished from
unaltered sediment by their characteristic color and the presence of internal cracks
(Meignen et al. 2007, Fig. 4.30). In Tabun Level B, stronger birefringence at the
edges of clay-rich soil aggregates is cited as possible evidence for heating of the
sediment (Albert et al. 1999; Courty et al. 1989). These observations can be further
supplemented by other microarchaeological studies. For example, magnetic susceptibility and mineralogy, when paired with micromorphology, have proved useful in
the identification of heated sediments (e.g., Herries and Fisher 2011). Likewise,
molecular analyses, such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), can be
used to document the presence of structural changes within certain clay minerals that
indicate heating to specific temperatures (e.g., Berna et al. 2007).

Postdepositional Chemical Alterations of Intact or Reworked Deposits
As evidenced by the dominance of cave sites in Tables 3, 4, and 5, most prehistoric
sites with visible or well-preserved combustion structures are found in caves or
rockshelters. This bias is due to the fact that hearths in open-air sites are susceptible
to a greater range of postdepositional modifications such as winnowing by wind,
transport and dissolution by water, and mechanical alteration by soil fauna. Ethnographic studies support these observations. Mallol et al. (2007) noted that the
components of open-air fires break down rapidly following abandonment. In a study
of Maasai hearths and trash pits of varying age, Shahack-Gross et al. (2004) documented vesicular structures indicative of ash dissolution. Their observations suggest
that dissolution proceeds quickly in open-air sites, with some features appearing
within a year of abandonment. However, hearths in caves are not immune to chemical
alteration. Despite highly alkaline groundwater environments, ash dissolution may

648

Mentzer

still occur within limestone cave deposits. In addition, caves are home to a number of
unique chemical microenvironments that contribute to the alteration or obliteration of
burned deposits. Finally, some cave systems and rockshelters are formed within
noncalcareous rock formations, such as sandstone or basalt. In these settings, dissolution can occur rapidly.
Because wood ashes are composed almost entirely of calcite, decalcification can
significantly undermine the preservation of ash layers in hearths and reworked
deposits. Decalcification of ashes has been documented in Paleolithic sites, such as
the sandstone rockshelter of Sibudu (Goldberg et al. 2009) and the open-air site of
Verberie (Wattez 1994). Decalcification occurs as a result of acidic conditions or
flushing of water with low amounts of dissolved calcium carbonate through porous
sediments. Decalcification can be recognized in the field by loss of volume (Goldberg
2000) and in thin section by dissolution pedofeatures, such as mammilate edges on
limestone fragments. Decalcification is a basic soil-forming process that occurs
within the leached surface horizons of sedimentary deposits and is responsible for
the breakdown of ashes in most open-air sites (Fig. 12).
Decalcification features are invaluable for understanding the ancient chemical
environment in sediments or the conditions of site burial. According to Sherwood
et al. (2004), decalcification in Dust Cave was more common during periods of less
intense use of the site. This is because anthropogenic materials, particularly wood ash,
raise sediment pH acting as primary buffering agents to sediment. Decalcification is
further slowed by arid conditions or prevented when water entering the sediments is
already saturated in calcite, as occurs in some limestone caves. Water becomes saturated
in calcite by dissolving overlying bedrock or carbonate-bearing sediments. If such
waters off-gas CO2 or evaporate within the combustion deposit, secondary carbonate

Fig. 12 Decalcification and ash dissolution are visible in thin sections from the open-air site of Mt.
Lykaion (a ritual burned deposit that nevertheless illustrates the taphonomic principles discussed in this
article). a Here, acidic rainwater infiltration has resulted in ash dissolution and decalcification of limestone
fragments in the upper 30 cm of the sacrificial ash altar to Zeus. Ashes are only present within cemented
aggregates (arrow) that have moved upward through the deposit as a result of bioturbation. The upper edge
of the limestone fragment exhibits a mammilate morphology indicative of dissolution. Sparry calcitic veins
within the fragment are more resistant to weathering. The remainder of the sediment is rich in sand- and siltsized fragments of charcoal and fragments of calcined bone (B); XPL. b Below 30 cm depth, ashes are well
preserved and present in association with pedogenic carbonates. This reworked deposit contains numerous
fragments of limestone and fragments of calcined and burned bone—some containing ashes in their pores
(arrow), in a matrix of ashes. The crescent shape of the ashes filling the spongy bone pores indicates that
the bone fragment has not moved from its original place of deposition; XPL

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

649

Fig. 13 Secondary carbonate in thin section. a Calcitic pedofeatures formed at depth within the sacrificial
ash altar to Zeus on Mt. Lykaion include pendants (arrow) on limestone and bone fragments. The calcite
sources from the dissolution of ash and limestone (see also Fig. 11). Burned bones are also present (B);
XPL. b Cemented ashes from the site of Üçağızlı I exhibit preserved rhomb-shaped grains in a matrix of
microsparry calcite. Secondary carbonate fills nearly all of the packing voids that were originally present
between the ashes. A fragment of partially carbonized tissue is present (arrow). Highly recrystallized ashes
(not pictured), when present in intact hearths, preserve only their original laminated fabrics, clay intercalations, and larger partially carbonized tissues; XPL

precipitation may also occur (Fig. 13); localized precipitation may result from water
uptake by plant roots. In many cases, wood ashes are both the source of carbonate to
the groundwater and loci for secondary carbonate precipitation. At Tabun Cave, for
example, micromorphology reveals that secondary carbonate precipitation is greatest
in the white, wood ash-rich layers of Level C (Albert et al. 1999). Calcite cementation
and recrystallization of ash has been documented at microscale at several sites,
including Qesem Cave (Karkanas et al. 2007), Sibudu (Goldberg et al. 2009),
Mesolithic site 16-D-4 (Zerboni 2011), and Amud Cave (Madella et al. 2002), where
secondary carbonates have replaced the original ash crystal rhombs (Shahack-Gross
et al. 2008). In Amud Cave, cementation of ashes by secondary carbonate is
corroborated by geochemical isotopic analyses (Shahack-Gross et al. 2008). In
Qesem Cave, partially recrystallized wood ashes are identified by preserved micritic
rhombs in a matrix of microspar and sparry calcite (Karkanas et al. 2007).
Although recrystallization and cementation can lead to loss of ash morphology and
fabric, these processes can also contribute to hearth preservation. In Pech de l’Azé IV,
the thickest deposits of combustion structures are present along the former position of
the cave’s drip line (Dibble et al. 2009). This arrangement of features may reflect
intentional positioning of the combustion structures close to the cave entrance.
Alternatively, calcareous drip waters concentrated near the entrance may have aided
in preservation of the features by cementing the ashes and preventing their erosion. In
Üçağızlı II, intact hearths are situated beneath the highest point of the chamber
ceiling. Whether this spatial arrangement is a consequence of hominin response to
cave morphology or to a greater abundance of dripping water is presently unknown
(Mentzer 2011). Finally, in the site of Sibudu, Middle Stone Age humans may have
exploited certain properties of cemented ashy hearths. Wadley (2010a) postulates that
gypsum-cemented ashes formed hard surfaces that were used as receptacles for
powdered yellow and red ochre. This hypothesis is supported by micromorphological

650

Mentzer

and geochemical analyses that indicate that the ochre fragments were not heated, and
thus, their introduction to the hearths postdated their firing.
Secondary cementation by carbonates, although conducive to the preservation of ash
layers, adversely impacts other burned materials. For example, secondary cementation
has contributed to the fragmentation of charcoal in possible combustion structures in
Pinnacle Point site PP13B (Karkanas and Goldberg 2010). In the site of Obi-Rakhmat,
secondary carbonate precipitation within pores has contributed to the mechanical
weathering of bone (Mallol et al. 2009). As mentioned above, chemical conditions
that are favorable for the preservation of calcitic ashes may result in the dissolution of
the siliceous phytolith component. Dissolution of silicates is evidenced in Qesem
Cave by the lack of both phytoliths and siliceous aggregates and the active precipitation of secondary carbonates in the ash deposits (Karkanas et al. 2007).
Phosphate-induced dissolution or replacement of the original mineral phases in ash
and bone by secondary minerals is a well-studied process in Paleolithic caves (Berna
et al. 2004; Karkanas et al. 1999, 2000, 2002; Mallol et al. 2010; Schiegl et al. 1996;
Weiner et al. 1993, 2002). The process was first documented in the sites of Hayonim
and Kebara Caves, the latter of which contains at least 46 Middle Paleolithic hearths
altered by secondary phosphatization (Schiegl et al. 1996). Similar features have
since been identified at other sites using a combination of micromorphology and
mineralogical analyses. For example, some alteration of ashes to dahllite is present in
the combustion features of Roc de Marsal (Goldberg et al. 2012). This transformation
is evidenced in thin section by ash layers containing domains of phosphate minerals
that are characteristically yellow in PPL and isotropic in XPL. In some samples, these
nodules also contain inclusions of amorphous silica identified using FTIR. Because
concentrated phosphatic solutions typically come from materials such as bat guano,
Goldberg et al. (2012) interpret these features, which overlie other, unaltered features,
as evidence of temporary abandonment of the site. Similar sequences are present in
Esquilleu Cave (Mallol et al. 2010) and Hohle Fels Cave, where periods of phosphatization appear to indicate not only abandonment of the site, but warm and wet
climatic conditions (Miller, unpublished).
Unlike dissolution, secondary mineral replacement of ash helps maintain the original
internal stratigraphy of the hearth or combustion feature. Therefore, when phosphatization occurs within a classic tripartite sequence of rubified sediment, charcoal, and ash,
the intact nature of the original deposit can be established (Karkanas 2001). These
sequences have been identified in sites such as Grotte XVI, Roc de Marsal, Esquilleu,
Sibudu, Hayonim, and Kebara, where secondary phosphatic minerals (some pseudomorphic after ashes) are present within hearth-like structures containing other combustion by-products such as charcoal, burned lithic materials, and bone (Courty et al.
1989; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Goldberg et al. 2009, 2012; Karkanas et al.
2002; Mallol et al. 2010). Gypsum, another secondary mineral that forms from
guano, is precipitated into some intact hearth sequences at Sibudu (Goldberg et al.
2009). Formation of large crystals results in localized movement of charcoal fragments but otherwise preserves the original stratigraphy. In highly altered features,
neither the original carbonate nor the secondary phosphate minerals are present, and
in situ combustion is evidenced by the presence of siliceous aggregates (Schiegl et al.
1996), as well as other materials such as charcoal and burned bone (e.g., Karkanas
and Goldberg 2010). Unfortunately, when the tripartite sequence is absent, it may be

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

651

more difficult to determine the original depositional fabric from the altered deposit.
For example, in Tabun Cave Level C, secondary phosphatization has replaced some
of the calcitic ashes in the generally white stratigraphic units (Albert et al. 1999). As
phosphatization has obliterated the original fabric of the ashes in this case, it is
impossible to determine whether the ashes that lend the units their white color are
in situ or reworked.
Finally, secondary chemical alteration can result in rubification of clay-sized
materials or primary geogenic layers within the sequences. In Pech de l’Azé IV,
some rubification may postdate the deposition of archaeological materials or sediments, as evidenced by the presence of both iron-stained bone fragments and hematite
in reddish layers (Dibble et al. 2009). In Grotte XVI, rubified layers also result from
the postdepositional concentration of hematite, perhaps as a result of microbial
activity (Karkanas et al. 1999; Karkanas 2008, personal communication). These
features highlight the importance of using additional tools, such as FTIR and FTIR
microspectroscopy (μ-FTIR) (e.g., Dibble et al. 2009), to evaluate the composition of
red sediments as well as molecular changes in clay minerals that result from heating.

Microarchaeological Evidence for Hearth Function and Related Behaviors
Consideration of combustion-related hominin behaviors often focuses on the spatial
arrangement of hearths with respect to landforms, other archaeological features, and
activity areas. For example, in Abric Romani, high-resolution study of numerous
intact combustion structures reveals that the positioning of hearths relative to karstic
features and other aspects of cave architecture changed through time. The “sleeping
area” of level N contains few archaeological remains and is associated with wood
preserved in travertine, which the researchers suggest may represent the remains of a
structure (Vallverdú et al. 2012). They propose that regularly spaced hearths in this
area near the wall of the cave were reused multiple times, although this hypothesis is
supported only by the thickness of the rubified substrate and not by micromorphological evidence. In levels K and L, hearths were also situated in defined areas
between the wall and drip line of the shelter (Pastó et al. 2000). In Abric Romani,
intact combustion structures are identified by rubified sediment overlain by mixtures
of ash and charcoal. Field-based measurements include the diameter of the structure
and the thickness of the rubification zone. Micromorphological study of some
combustion features confirms that the ash–charcoal layer results from burning in situ.
Micromorphology is the most reliable method of confirming the presence of intact
hearths. However, the technique offers us much more than this, as it can be used to
identify and study other combustion-related behaviors and materials. These human
behaviors include choice of substrate and hearth preparation activities, hearth reuse
and maintenance behavior, and abandonment behaviors, such as trampling. For
example, the presence of a visible hearth lining generally defines a prepared surface
in the field. Rock pavers may be identified and studied in hand sample; however, as
demonstrated at the sites of Klissoura Cave and Dust Cave, clay surfaces are best
characterized using petrographic methods (Karkanas et al. 2004; Sherwood and
Chapman 2005) with heating confirmed by FTIR or differential thermal analysis
(Karkanas 2010). On the basis of different hearth morphologies with or without clay

652

Mentzer

lining, Karkanas et al. (2004) proposed a functional model for the Upper Paleolithic
prepared hearths at Klissoura Cave involving a main burning area and satellite areas.
They also suggest that the prepared clay burning surfaces at Klissoura were swept or
cleaned prior to reuse. The Aurignacian deposits contain reworked burned materials
that may be related to sweeping and cleaning behaviors. Meignen et al. (2001)
discuss a similar model for hearth use at Kebara Cave. Supported by micromorphological evidence for repeated hearth reuse and movement of hot coals, Meignen et al.
(2001) suggest that actively burning fuels were moved throughout the site for various
purposes. Reuse of hearth features has been documented at other sites, such as
Vanguard Cave (Macphail and Goldberg 2000). At Vanguard, micromorphology also
contributed to the study of the unmodified substrate. The presence of intact combustion structures atop a variety of burned substrates at Vanguard Cave was indicative of
a lack of substrate choice in situating combustion activities in the Middle Paleolithic
(Macphail and Goldberg 2000).
Micromorphology is especially useful for identifying hearth maintenance behaviors such as sweeping and dumping or hearth rake-out. These and other activities,
such as stirring and cooking, have been documented in ethnographic studies. For
example, Mallol et al. (2007) observed Hadza villagers stirring coals in long-lived
(3–4 months) sleeping and cooking fires in order to maintain heat and ensure that fuel
burned to completion prior to renewal of the fire. Periodically, the Hadza would also
scoop ashes out of long-lived hearths, a behavior that over time produced concave
depressions at the base of the structures. Cooking fires, unlike fires built for other
purposes (such as sleeping or tool manufacture), contained organic and inorganic
residues from food. Although similar types of residues have yet to be recognized in
archaeological hearths, raking, sweeping, and dumping deposits have been identified
based on characteristic microscopic composition, fabric, and structure (Table 7); these
deposits, like overthickened combustion structures, are associated with long-term
reuse of activity areas.
Rake-out deposits (Fig. 14a) result from the lateral spreading of burned material
during combustion (Homsey and Capo 2006) or after cooling (Meignen et al. 2007).
Rake-out deposits are identified at microscale by the presence of charcoal, ash,
rubified sediment (when present), and other materials arranged roughly horizontally
(especially the larger fragments; see Meignen et al. 2007, Fig. 5.A.24), but not
comprising distinct bands or beds of uniform composition. Nonburned materials
may also be mixed into the unit. Rake-out deposits exhibit generally high porosity
relative to intact combustion structures. Homsey and Capo (2006) identify the byproducts of hearth rake-out as thin lenses of charcoal present in the sediments of Dust
Cave. They state that, unlike ash dumping, the presence of charcoal in the stringers
indicates that this behavior took place prior to the completion of combustion and
produced sediments enriched in charcoal relative to ash. In Sibudu, Goldberg et al.
(2009) identify a homogeneous, burned, and anthropogenic microfacies containing
charcoal, bone, and phosphate (altered ashes) that they hypothesize formed as a result
of rake-out or dumping of combusted materials. Indistinct ashy accumulations,
bedded discontinuous deposits, or centimeter-sized aggregates of ashes mixed with
charcoal are present in the combustion areas at Kebara Cave. These are likewise
interpreted as combustion features that have been reworked by human activities such
as hot coal displacement or cold hearth rake-out (Meignen et al. 2007). Rake-out is

Within a fire

Within and around a fire

Anywhere, often identified within
or around a fire

Above and around a fire

Away from the fire

Away from the fire and activity areas

Sweeping

Rake-out

Trampling

Bedding

Ash dumping

Waste dumping

Heterogeneous deposit of burned materials
mixed with other debris

Homogeneous deposit of nearly pure ashes
with occasional inclusions of rubified
or burned substrate aggregates; open
or chaotic structure; absence of pseudocarbonized
wood structures or laminations

Layers of aligned or articulated phytoliths (burned
or unburned) above combustion structures
or rake-out deposits; often accompanied by trampling

Compression of burned materials; downward movement
of large fragments into lower compositional units;
in situ fracturing of burned bone, charcoal and shell

Horizontal beds (stringers) of unsorted burned
materials; absence of or discontinuity/truncation
in compositional layering; rounded aggregates
of ashes and charcoal; blurring of combustion feature
boundaries; alignment of large fragment long axes;
mixture with unburned materials; high porosity

Erosional surface within a hearth; development
of a concave substrate; upward mixture of substrate
aggregates into the hearth

Amorphous phosphatic particles; charred animal
tissue and bone; higher amounts of amorphous organic
material in the substrate

Complete combustion of fuel

Features

Courty et al. 1989; Shahack-Gross et al. 2004;
Villagran et al. 2009, 2011a

Araujo et al. 2008; Homsey and Capo 2006;
Goldberg 2001, 2003; Karkanas et al. 2004;
Meignen et al. 2007; Mentzer 2011

Cabanes et al. 2010; Goldberg et al. 2009;
Mallol et al. 2010; Wadley et al. 2011

Balbo et al. 2010; Dibble et al. 2009;
Goldberg et al. 2009, 2012; Karkanas 2010;
Karkanas and Goldberg 2010;
Mallol et al. 2010; Meignen et al. 2007;
Miller et al. 2009; Schiegl et al. 2003;
Zerboni 2011

Dibble et al. 2009; Homsey and Capo 2006;
Goldberg et al. 2009, 2012; Karkanas and
Goldberg 2010; Meignen et al. 2007;
Sherwood 2001, 2008

Mallol et al. 2007

Mallol et al. 2007

Mallol et al. 2007

Citations

These behaviors have been observed in ethnographic and experimental settings or documented in multiple archaeological studies cited here and in the text. Behaviors are listed in
order of proximity to the original hearth

Within a fire

Within or above a fire

Coal stirring

Cooking

Location

Behavior

Table 7 Micromorphological signatures of hearth-related behaviors

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features
653

654

Mentzer

Fig. 14 Anthropogenically reworked burned materials are in secondary position due to the activities of
hominins. a An intact ash layer from the site of Üçağızlı I is overlain by probable rake-out containing ashes
mixed with aligned bone fragments and geogenic sediment; 5×7-cm petrographic thin section, incident
light. b An incident light scan of a 5×7-cm petrographic thin section from the site of La Quina illustrates
the loose structure and heterogeneous composition of a probable dumped deposit containing abundant
burned bones mixed with ashes and limestone fragments

suggested as a cause of the diffuse appearance of combustion feature boundaries in
the field, as well as the clear erosional surfaces visible within combustion sequences
at Pech de l’Azé IV (Dibble et al. 2009; Goldberg et al. 2012) and Pinnacle Point site
PP13B (Karkanas and Goldberg 2010).
Sweeping and dumping of ashes from hearths occurs after combustion (Fig. 14b).
This process generates erosional surfaces and upward mixing of substrate aggregates
within the combustion feature (Mallol et al. 2007) and also results in the formation of
a midden when burned materials are mixed with other anthropogenic waste (Homsey
and Capo 2006) or an ash dump when ashes are the sole component of the feature
(Goldberg 2001, 2003). According to Schiegl et al. (2003), the paired processes of
sweeping and dumping are likely responsible for the significant deposits of burned
bone found in several German and French Paleolithic caves. Miller et al. (2009)
report the inclusion of rubified clasts of sediment with experimentally swept and
dumped hearth materials, as well as an open, chaotic microstructure in experimental
material that was swept or dumped, although they question the preservation of this
structure over archaeological timescales. An archaeological example of an ash dump
comes from the rear of Kebara Cave. This feature is 90 cm thick and composed of
ashes interbedded with thin layers of clay. Goldberg (2001) and Meignen et al. (2007)
hypothesize that this deposit formed when ashes were repeatedly removed from
hearths and dumped, with subsequent reworking of the dumped materials by water.
Similar features have also been documented at Üçağızlı I Cave (Goldberg 2003;
Mentzer 2011). Finally, incorporation of dumped burned materials with other

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

655

discarded occupation debris yields heterogeneous midden deposits. Middens are
identified in thin section by mixed burned and nonburned materials, high porosity,
and decreased fragmentation of fragile materials such as coarse bones and shell
(Courty et al. 1989; Villagran et al. 2009, 2011a).
Bedding, or the intentional spreading of leafy or grassy plant materials across an
area to create a surface, has been identified in association with combustion features at
several Paleolithic sites. In Esquilleu Cave, reworked combustion features are capped
by layers of articulated grass phytoliths (Mallol et al. 2010). Because these phytoliths
are unheated, the layers of bedding were likely laid down after the underlying burned
materials were dispersed (Cabanes et al. 2010). Other sites that may preserve similar
bedding areas containing combustion materials include Sibudu (Goldberg et al. 2009;
Wadley et al. 2011) and the aforementioned “sleeping area” of Abric Romani
(Vallverdú et al. 2012). At Sibudu, the multiple aligned layers of fibrous materials
interbedded with combustion features are sometimes charred or fully burned. Goldberg et al. (2009) and Wadley et al. (2011) interpret these sequences as bedding that
was accidentally or intentionally ignited.
Postdepositional anthropogenic modification of combustion features and deposits
may result from unintentional behaviors such as trampling of the burned area
following combustion or during later periods of occupation (e.g., Grotte XVI; Rigaud
et al. 1995) (Fig. 15). Meignen et al. (2007) distinguish trampled burned features
from nontrampled areas using a series of criteria including visible compaction, offsets
in bedding, and localized downward movement of materials. Trampling has also been
identified in archaeological settings by the compaction and in situ breakage of
combustion materials or burned bones (Balbo et al. 2010; Dibble et al. 2009;
Goldberg et al. 2009, 2012; Karkanas 2010; Karkanas and Goldberg 2010; Mallol
et al. 2010; Schiegl et al. 2003; Zerboni 2011). This characteristic signature has been
replicated in experimental settings (Miller et al. 2009). In Pech de l’Azé IV, postdepositional trampling identified using the above guidelines contributed to compaction
of the deposits, which, along with rapid cementation, aided in the preservation of the
combustion features (Dibble et al. 2009).

Fig. 15 Trampled materials are
identified in thin section and in
the field by in situ breakage.
Burned bone from the site of
Pech de l’Azé IV. Scale bar is
1 mm; PPL

656

Mentzer

In many sites, the combustion-related behaviors discussed above are combined in
multicomponent sequences of repeated activities. In some cases, these sequences
have also been impacted by natural postdepositional mixing or alteration processes.
The deposits in Sibudu, for example, contain complex sequences of hearth construction, rake-out, trampling, and bedding, as well as postdepositional ash dissolution and
phosphatic alteration (Goldberg et al. 2009). Similar sequences of trampling, rakeout, and bioturbation are proposed as processes that affected the homogeneous
Middle Paleolithic ashy and burned materials excavated at Hayonim Cave (Goldberg
and Bar-Yosef 1998).
The types of combustion features described above may be integrated with other
archaeological and geological datasets to generate a more complete understanding of
the use of space and tempo of occupation within prehistoric sites. The identification
of intact hearths versus anthropogenically modified features can aid in the mapping of
central and peripheral activity areas. Hearths are loci for many types of activities—
some visible in the archaeological and ethnoarchaeological records (Audouze and
Enloe 1997; Binford 1978; O’Connell 1987; Simms 1988; Stevenson 1985, 1991;
Vaquero and Pastó 2001; Yellen 1977). On the other hand, ash dumps and middens
occur in areas where people spend little time and their accurate identification can
reveal as much as hearths about spatial planning in the site (Speth 2006; Speth et al.
2012). In several examples presented above, microarchaeological techniques were
instrumental in distinguishing between primary and secondary refuse. For example, at
a Mesolithic site in the Sudan, micromorphology allowed Zerboni (2011) to distinguish between trash pits containing burned materials and intact or partially reworked
fireplace pits. Intermediate deposits, such as trampled materials, can contribute to the
identification of occupation surfaces in ephemeral sites. Of course, spatial organization of all types of combustion features excavated in confined spaces, such as caves
and rockshelters, can be influenced by the wall and ceiling morphology and microenvironments within the site. For example, archaeologists should consider hearth
placement with respect to chimneys, natural vents, high and low ceilings, active drip
centers, and entrances. Preference for dry areas within the site has been observed at
Dust Cave (Sherwood 2001), while at Üçağızlı II, the situation of stacked hearths
beneath the high point of the cave ceiling and active drip centers contributed to the
preservation of the features (Mentzer 2011). Finally, some studies have revealed that
hearths and secondary refuse can be used to understand repeated behaviors and
seasonality (Meignen et al. 2007; Villagran et al. 2011a). In the ethnographic site
of Tunel VII, for example, dumped materials from more intense fires are correlated
with winter occupation of the site (Villagran et al. 2011a).

Summary and Future Directions
The discussion and case studies presented here demonstrate how archaeologists may
effectively document and interpret combustion features in archaeological sites. A few
key points are highlighted briefly below. First, high-resolution analytical advances,
such as the techniques of archaeological micromorphology, phytolith studies, and in
situ mineralogical analyses, have created a wealth of information regarding hearth
construction, maintenance, and postdepositional sedimentary conditions. On the other

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

657

hand, such advances have increased the number of specialists that work at sites,
particularly Paleolithic sites, and force excavators to make decisions regarding the
degree to which individual features should be studied. The discussion above has also
highlighted some inconsistencies in the archaeological identification of combustion
structures, specifically the poorly understood phenomenon of rubification, and the
acceptable range in variability of compositional layers as a function of feature type.
Finally, the review of archaeological sites containing combustion features that have
been studied using micromorphology reveals biases towards cave sites and also
against sites of late Upper Paleolithic, Epipaleolithic, Mesolithic, and Natufian ages,
as well as their African and New World equivalents. These biases may be limiting
important comparisons of pyrotechnology between time periods.
The technique of archaeological micromorphology has been instrumental in the
identification and interpretation of hearth formation sequences, as well as burned
materials that are not visible with the naked eye (i.e., wood ashes). The technique has
allowed for the secure identification of controlled burning in sites as early as 400 kyr
BP (Barkai et al. 2003; Karkanas et al. 2007), a period which, until very recently, has
been only associated with indirect evidence for burning (see James et al. 1989).
Micromorphological studies reveal that, because of the combined effects of hominin
behaviors prior to, during, and after burning, as well as the numerous natural
postdepositional modifications (see also Table 2), it is possible for combustion
structures to appear intact in the field, yet exhibit features consistent with reworking
at microscale (e.g., Tabun Layer C). Conversely, some structures that appear ambiguous in the field—lenses of ashes lacking underlying charcoal or rubification zones,
for example—may in microscale exhibit fabrics that indicate little to no postdepositional movement. These possibilities highlight the fact that, in order to interpret the
distribution(s) of combustion features within sites, it is necessary to document clearly
when burned materials are in situ or reworked.
The success of micromorphology in the identification of intact and reworked
features argues for its application at a wide variety of archaeological sites. Unfortunately, micromorphology can become ungainly when sites contain hundreds of
hearths or burned deposits (e.g., Abric Romani, Kebara Cave, Hayonim Cave, El
Salt). Here, other microarchaeological techniques can contribute to a triage system, of
sorts, in the excavation and analysis of combustion features. As an example, at Abric
Romani, Vallverdú et al. (2012) and Courty et al. (2010) have developed site-specific
field methods that bridge the gap between excavation and laboratory analyses.
Identification of intact combustion structures is made when rubified sediments are
overlain by sediment that, according to expedient laboratory analyses, contains
>40 % charcoal—termed “carbonaceous facies” (Vallverdú et al. 2010, 2012). The
accuracy of these methods has been confirmed by paired micromorphological analyses that consistently reveal intact combustion structures containing ash, charcoal,
and other compounds (Courty et al. 2010). Proposed future microstratigraphic sampling and excavation of sediments from combustion structures will be guided by
findings from earlier thin sections and on-site loose sediment and microdebris
analyses.
Other model excavations include the sites of Kebara Cave, Sibudu, Pinnacle Point
site PP13B, and Dust Cave (Albert et al. 2000, 2012; Bar-Yosef et al. 1992; Goldberg
2003; Goldberg and Bar-Yosef 1998; Meignen et al. 1989, 2007; Schiegl et al. 1996;

658

Mentzer

Weiner et al. 1993; Goldberg and Berna 2010; Goldberg et al. 2009; Miller and
Sievers 2012; Schiegl and Conard 2006; Speth 2006; Speth et al. 2012; Wadley 2010,
2012; Wadley et al. 2011; Herries and Fisher 2011; Karkanas and Goldberg 2010;
Homsey and Capo 2006; Homsey and Sherwood 2010; Sherwood 2001, 2008;
Sherwood and Chapman 2005; Sherwood et al. 2004). Each of these excavations
utilizes numerous microarchaeological techniques to build site-specific classification
systems for combustion features that consider differences in feature function and
taphonomy. Several investigators (e.g., Homsey and Sherwood 2010) have gained
further insight from experiments in burning and formation processes. All have
contributed to methodological developments and further understanding of the range
of behaviors of prehistoric peoples.
Future directions in the microarchaeological study of combustion features include
further investigation into combustion processes, such as rubification and magnetization, increasing the volume of information that can be generated from intact sediment
block and petrographic thin sections and expansion of these analyses outside of the
earlier periods of the Paleolithic. Experimental and ethnographic microarchaeology
are also promising avenues for exploring whether the functions of hearths can be
deduced from their microscopic contents. Using the present methods, the question of
hearth function is unresolvable in most sites.
Rubification, an understudied phenomenon associated with burning, suffers from the
problem of equifinality. Some researchers have attempted to quantify the degree of
rubification as a function of burning temperature and intensity (e.g., Canti and Linford
2000). Others (e.g., Vallverdú et al. 2012) use the thickness of rubified layers in
combustion structures as a proxy for firing duration. However, unlike other materials,
such as bones, wherein molecular changes in the mineral phase occur at known
temperatures (Hiller et al. 2003; Rogers and Daniels 2002; Shipman et al. 1984;
Stiner et al. 1995), rubified sediments do not behave predictably in response to certain
temperatures or firing duration thresholds. Substrate response to heating, and the
resulting the color and thickness of the altered zone can depend on a number of
factors. In addition, hematite formation and associated color changes can occur
postdepositionally as a side effect of the in situ breakdown of organic materials
(Karkanas et al. 2002). Finally, rubification is not easily or consistently identified or
described in thin section. Rubification, its presence and absence in a variety of substrates,
and associated microarchaeological features are important avenues for future research.
Integrated, multidisciplinary studies of intact sediment blocks and petrographic thin
sections or the “microcontextual approach” (Goldberg and Berna 2010) are developing
quickly within the field of Paleolithic combustion feature research. When combined
with traditional optical petrography and organic reflectance petrography, μ-FTIR
analyses of clay and bone heating temperatures (e.g., Dibble et al. 2009; Goldberg
and Berna 2010; Goldberg et al. 2009, 2012; Wadley et al. 2011; Berna et al. 2012)
have the potential to significantly expand the types of information that can be used to
compare multiple burning episodes within a single hearth or site. This approach
should also be utilized when studying ethnographic and experimental features.
Finally, the case studies listed in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 indicate two main trends in
combustion feature research. First, sites containing intact hearths are overwhelmingly
situated within caves and rockshelters. Second, Upper Paleolithic and later combustion features are understudied in comparison to Middle Paleolithic combustion

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

659

features, despite the fact that the former are more numerous. In fact, many micromorphological studies of Upper Paleolithic combustion features come from sites that
contain both Middle and Upper Paleolithic components.
The bias towards cave and rockshelter sites is due to the superior preservation of
burned materials, in particular ashes, in alkaline karstic environments. It is not a
coincidence that the earliest secure evidence for controlled fire (Karkanas et al. 2007)
comes from a cave. The deposits in Qesem Cave do indeed evidence significant
hominin behavioral developments; however, these developments may be related to
landscape exploitation rather than to fire activities per se. In later periods, a propensity towards the study of combustion features in caves may also result in biases in the
association between hearths and other types of domestic features. Only recently and
only with significant interdisciplinary and microarchaeological contributions have
researchers begun to explore the environmental contexts and differences in archaeological assemblages with and without associated hearths (Sandgathe et al. 2011).
The focus on earlier periods in combustion feature research stems from the
aforementioned, long-standing interest in the earliest controlled fire (e.g., James et
al. 1989) and ongoing debates over the role of fire in the colonization of the northern
latitudes (e.g., Roebroeks and Villa 2011; Sandgathe et al. 2011). The presence of
well-controlled fires in later periods is less sensational and, therefore, receives less
attention. In addition, Upper Paleolithic and later sites may not be sampled as
frequently due to the presence of other markers of in situ combustion, such as
constructed fireplaces with rock-lined edges and basal pavings. Constructed fireplaces are durable and are intended to be used repeatedly. These features are also
most easily recognized during excavation. When archaeologists rely only on macroscopic markers to identify combustion areas, more expedient features may be ignored. Furthermore, as evidenced by the case studies presented above, the end goal in
combustion feature research is not simply to document the presence and location of
fires within sites. Microarchaeological techniques can be used to extract information
about the diversity of pyrotechnologies and the formational histories of sites. Given
the very detailed and valuable information that can be recovered from microlaminae within
combustion features, it is likely that, due to a bias against research on Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene sites (see Table 5), the full range of modern human forager combustionrelated behaviors have not been documented. The lack of studies of sites from these
time periods, therefore, currently limits not only our ability to compare datasets within
specific geographic areas, but also the development of nuanced understandings of site
structure and human activities. The case study from Dust Cave in particular provides a
tantalizing glimpse into the diversification of combustion activities that may be associated with plant processing and consumption during the late Paleoindian and Archaic
periods in North America (Homsey and Capo 2006; Homsey and Sherwood 2010;
Sherwood 2001; Sherwood and Chapman 2005; Sherwood et al. 2004).
Given the scholarly interest in intensification behaviors at the end of the Pleistocene and the early Holocene, higher-resolution analyses of combustion features
within these sites may prove exceptionally valuable. Some key questions that may
guide future archaeological and experimental research include:
1. What are the microarchaeological signatures of specialized combustion activities,
such as food smoking, stone heating, roasting, and boiling?

660

Mentzer

2. What does it mean when prepared burning surfaces become more or less common in archaeological sites? If we only document these features (because they
are most visible), what impact does this have on our interpretations of activity
patterns, mobility, and spatial organization?
3. Do later developments in the form and function of combustion features used for
materials processing, ritual purposes, cremations, or cleaning have their roots in
earlier periods?
4. Can the study of combustion feature distributions, when integrated with paleoenvironmental and macroarchaeological data, contribute to reconstructions of
occupation intensity on site-specific and regional scales?
The proliferation of microarchaeological techniques in combustion feature research has allowed an impressive variety of human behaviors and postdepositional
processes to be documented in Paleolithic sites. However, there is still a tremendous
amount left to learn about and from the use of fire by peoples in the past.
The information presented underscores the urgency for applying the techniques and
synthetic approaches developed previously in research on Paleolithic sites to more recent
periods. Microarchaeological approaches have assisted greatly in documenting the antiquity or geographical distribution of the controlled use of fire. However, systematic
investigation of the pyrotechnologies of hunter–gatherers must be expanded to include
sites dating to Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene, when the human pyrotechnic
“footprint” increased both in scale and complexity. We also need more nuanced, accurate
data on permanent and ephemeral burning localities, fuel sources for fires, and the
organization of domestic spaces and activity areas. Expansion in the application of
existing techniques to later cultural periods can, therefore, greatly improve our understanding of the dynamics of landscape changes brought about by humans, as well as the
restructuring of occupation areas within sites that accompanied increases in sedentism.
Acknowledgments The author is grateful to J. Quade, M. Stiner, P. Goldberg, and S. Kuhn for providing
comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. Funding for research and a portion of the writing was provided, in
part, by the PEO Foundation and the University of Arizona School of Anthropology Emil Haury Dissertation
Improvement Grant. Support for micromorphological analyses and access to collections cited in this paper were
provided by the Asıklı Höyük project funded by NSF grant no. BCS-0912148 to M. Stiner; the Mt. Lykaion
Excavation and Survey Project, funded by donations from Nicholas and Athena Karabots, the Karabots Foundation and Annette Merle-Smith; the excavations at Pech de l’Azé IV funded by an NSF grant to H. Dibble, samples
collected by P. Goldberg; the La Quina project, funded by an NSF grant to A. Jelinek, samples collected by T.D.
Young; the excavations at Üçağızlı Caves I and II, funded by NSF grant nos. SBR-9804722, BCS-0106433, and
BCS-0410654 and a Leakey Foundation Grant, samples collected by P. Goldberg. The author would also like to
thank T. Manne and C. Miller for their insights on the topic and contributions to experimental combustion research
and the three reviewers for their thoughtful comments and suggestions.

References
Adler, D. S., Prindiville, T. J., & Conard, N. J. (2003). Patterns of spatial organization and land use during
the Eemian Interglacial in the Rhineland: New data from Wallertheim, Germany. Eurasian Prehistory,
1(2), 25–78.
Aitken, M. J. (1978). Archaeological involvements of physics. Physics Reports, 40(5), 277–351.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

661

Aitken, M. J. (1985). Thermoluminescence dating. London: Academic.
Aitken, M. J. (1998). An introduction to optical dating. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Akazawa, T., & Sakaguchi, Y. (1987). Paleolithic site of Douara Cave and paleogeography of Palmyra
Basin in Syria, part IV: 1984 excavations. Tokyo: The University of Tokyo.
Albert, R. M., & Weiner, S. (2001). Study of phytoliths in prehistoric ash layers from Kebara and Tabun
caves using a quantitative approach. In J. D. Meunier & F. Colin (Eds.), Phytoliths: Applications in
earth sciences and human history (pp. 251–266). Lisse: Swets and Zeitlinger.
Albert, R. M., Lavi, O., Estroff, L., Weiner, S., Tsatskin, A., Ronen, A., et al. (1999). Mode of occupation of
Tabun Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel during the Mousterian Period: A study of the sediments and phytoliths.
Journal of Archaeological Science, 26(10), 1249–1260.
Albert, R. M., Weiner, S., Bar Yosef, O., & Meignen, L. (2000). Phytoliths in the Middle Palaeolithic
deposits of Kebara Cave, Mt. Carmel, Israel: Study of the plant materials used for fuel and other
purposes. Journal of Archaeological Science, 27(10), 931–947.
Albert, R. M., Berna, F., & Goldberg, P. (2012). Insights on Neanderthal fire use at Kebara Cave (Israel)
through high resolution study of prehistoric combustion features: Evidence from phytoliths and thin
sections. Quaternary International, 247, 278–293.
Alperson-Afil, N., Sharon, G., Kislev, M., Melamed, Y., Zohar, I., Ashkenazi, S., et al. (2009). Spatial
organization of hominin activities at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Science, 326(5960), 1677–1680.
Angelucci, D. E. (2003). Geoarchaeology and micromorphology of Abric de la Cativera (Catalonia, Spain).
Catena, 54(3), 573–601.
Araujo, A. G. M., Feathers, J. K., Arroyo-Kalin, M., & Tizuka, M. M. (2008). Lapa das Boleiras
rockshelter: Stratigraphy and formation processes at a Paleoamerican site in Central Brazil. Journal
of Archaeological Science, 35(12), 3186–3202.
Arpin, T. L., Mallol, C., & Goldberg, P. (2002). Short contribution: A new method of analyzing and
documenting micromorphological thin sections using flatbed scanners: Applications in geoarchaeological studies. Geoarchaeology-An International Journal, 17(3), 305–313.
Asouti, E. (2003). Woodland vegetation and fuel exploitation at the prehistoric campsite of Pınarbaşı,
south-central Anatolia, Turkey: The evidence from the wood charcoal macro-remains. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 30, 1185–1201.
Audouze, F., & Enloe, J. G. (1997). High resolution archaeology at Verberie: Limits and interpretations.
World Archaeology, 29(2), 195–207.
Balbo, A. L., Madella, M., Vila, A., & Estévez, J. (2010). Micromorphological perspectives on the
stratigraphical excavation of shell middens: A first approximation from the ethnohistorical site Tunel
VII, Tierra del Fuego (Argentina). Journal of Archaeological Science, 37, 1252–1259.
Barkai, R., Gopher, A., Lauritzen, S. E., & Frumkin, A. (2003). Uranium series dates from Qesem Cave,
Israel, and the end of the Lower Palaeolithic. Nature, 423(6943), 977–979.
Bar-Yosef, O., Vandermeersch, B., Arensburg, B., Belfer-Cohen, A., Goldberg, P., Laville, H., et al. (1992).
The excavations in Kebara Cave, Mount Carmel. Current Anthropology, 33(5), 497–550.
Berna, F., & Goldberg, P. (2008). Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and associated hominin behavior in
Israel. Israel Journal of Earth Science, 56, 107–121.
Berna, F., Matthews, A., & Weiner, S. (2004). Solubilities of bone mineral from archaeological sites: The
recrystallization window. Journal of Archaeological Science, 31(7), 867–882.
Berna, F., Behar, A., Shahack-Gross, R., Berg, J., Boaretto, E., Gilboa, A., et al. (2007). Sediments exposed
to high temperatures: Reconstructing pyrotechnological processes in Late Bronze and Iron Age Strata
at Tel Dor (Israel). Journal of Archaeological Science, 34(3), 358–373.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., Horwitz, L. K., Brink, J., Holt, S., Bamford, M., et al. (2012). Microstratigraphic
evidence of in situ fire in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape province, South
Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, E1215–E1220.
Binford, L. R. (1978). Dimensional analysis of behavior and site structure: Learning from an Eskimo
hunting stand. American Antiquity, 43(3), 330–361.
Bird, M. I., Fifield, L. K., Santos, G. M., Beaumont, P. B., Zhou, Y., di Tada, M. L., et al. (2003).
Radiocarbon dating from 40 to 60 ka BP at Border Cave, South Africa. Quaternary Science Reviews,
22(8–9), 943–947.
Boardman, S., & Jones, G. (1990). Experiments on the effects of charring on cereal plant components.
Journal of Archaeological Science, 17, 1–11.
Boschian, G. (1997). Sedimentology and soil micromorphology of the late Pleistocene and early Holocene
deposits of Grotta dell’Edera (Trieste Karst, NE Italy). Geoarchaeology, 12(3), 227–249.
Braadbaart, F., & Poole, I. (2008). Morphological, chemical and physical changes during charcoalification of
wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts. Journal of Archaeological Science, 35(9), 2434–2445.

662

Mentzer

Brochier, J. É., & Thinon, M. (2003). Calcite crystals, starch grains aggregates or…POCC? Comment on
‘calcite crystals inside archaeological plant tissues’. Journal of Archaeological Science, 30(9), 1211–
1214.
Cabanes, D., Mallol, C., Expósito, I., & Baena, J. (2010). Phytolith evidence for hearths and beds in the late
Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu cave (Cantabria, Spain). Journal of Archaeological Science, 37
(11), 2947–2957.
Canti, M. G. (2003). Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant ashes found in
archaeological soils. Catena, 54(3), 339–361.
Canti, M. G., & Linford, N. (2000). The effects of fire on archaeological soils and sediments: Temperature
and colour relationships. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 66, 385–395.
Carmody, R. N., & Wrangham, R. W. (2009). The energetic significance of cooking. Journal of Human
Evolution, 57(4), 379–391.
Chu, V., Regev, L., Weiner, S., & Boaretto, E. (2008). Differentiating between anthropogenic calcite in
plaster, ash and natural calcite using infrared spectroscopy: Implications in archaeology. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 35(4), 905–911.
Clark, J. L., & Ligouis, B. (2010). Burned bone in the Howieson’s Poort and post-Howieson’s Poort Middle
Stone Age deposits at Sibudu (South Africa): Behavioral and taphonomic implications. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 37(10), 2650–2661.
Cohen-Ofri, I., Weiner, L., Boaretto, E., Mintz, G., & Weiner, S. (2006). Modern and fossil charcoal:
Aspects of structure and diagenesis. Journal of Archaeological Science, 33(3), 428–439.
Conard, N. J., Prindiville, T. J., & Adler, D. S. (1998). Refitting bones and stones as a means of
reconstructing Middle Paleolithic subsistence in the Rhineland. In J. P. Brugal, L. Meignen, & M.
Patou-Mathis (Eds.), Economie Préhistorique: Les Comportements de Subsistence au Paleolithique,
Editions APDCA (pp. 273–290). Antibes: Sophia Antipolis.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Brugal, J. P., & Guilbert, R. (2005). Taphonomic consequences of the
use of bones as fuel. Experimental data and archaeological applications. In T. O’Conner (Ed.),
Biosphere to lithosphere: New studies in vertebrate taphonomy (pp. 51–62). London: Oxbow Books.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Brugal, J. P., & Guilbert, R. (2009). Combustible ou non? Analyse
multifactorielle et modèles explicatifs sur des ossements brûlées paléolithiques. In I. Théry-Parisot, S.
Costamagno, & A. Henry (Eds.), Gestion des Combustibles au Paléolithique et au Mésolithique:
Nouveaux Outils, Nouvelles Interpretations (pp. 65–84). Oxford: Archaeopress.
Courty, M. A., Goldberg, P., & Macphail, R. I. (1989). Soils and micromorphology in archaeology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Courty, M.-A., Carbonell, E., Vallverdú Poch, J., & Banerjee, R. (2010). Microstratigraphic and multianalytical evidence for advanced Neanderthal pyrotechnology at Abric Romani (Capellades, Spain).
Quaternary International. doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2010.10.031.
Crawford, H. (1981). Some fire installations from Abu Salabikh, Iraq (Dedicated to the memory of
Margaret Munn-Rankin). Paléorient, 7(2), 105–114.
Dibble, H. L., Chase, P. G., Shannon, P. M., & Tuffreau, A. (1997). Testing the reality of a “living floor”
with archaeological data. American Antiquity, 62(4), 629–651.
Dibble, H., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S. J. P., Mentzer, S., Niven, L., et al. (2009). A preliminary
report on Pech de l’Azé IV, Layer 8 (Middle Paleolithic, France). PaleoAnthropology, 2009, 182–219.
Dreimanis, A. (1962). Quantitative gasometric determination of calcite and dolomite by using Chittick
apparatus. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 32(3), 520–529.
Drever, J. I. (1997). The geochemistry of natural waters: Surface and groundwater environments. Upper
Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Elbaum, R., Weiner, S., Albert, R. M., & Elbaum, M. (2003). Detection of burning of plant materials in the
archaeological record by changes in the refractive indices of siliceous phytoliths. Journal of Archaeological Science, 30(2), 217–226.
Elefanti, P., Panagopoulou, E., & Karkanas, P. (2008). The transition from the Middle to the Upper
Paleolithic in the southern Balkans: The evidence from the Lakonis I Cave, Greece. Eurasian
Prehistory, 5(2), 85–95.
Eliyahu-Behar, A., Regev, L., Shilstein, S., Weiner, S., Shalev, Y., Sharon, I., et al. (2009). Identifying a
Roman casting pit at Tel Dor, Israel: Integrating field and laboratory research. Journal of Field
Archaeology, 34(2), 135–151.
Etiégni, L., & Campbell, A. G. (1991). Physical and chemical characteristics of wood ash. Bioresource
Technology, 37(2), 173–178.
Folk, R. L., & Hoops, G. K. (1982). An Early Iron-Age layer of glass made from plants at Tel Yin’am,
Israel. Journal of Field Archaeology, 9(4), 455–466.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

663

Gale, R., & Carruthers, W. (2000). Charcoal and charred seed remains from Middle Palaeolithic levels at
Gorham’s and Vanguard Caves. In C. B. Stringer, R. N. E. Barton, & J. C. Finlayson (Eds.),
Neanderthals on the edge. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Godino, I. B., Álvarez, M., Balbo, A., Zurro, D., Madella, M., Villagrán, X., et al. (2011). Towards highresolution shell midden archaeology: Experimental and ethnoarchaeology in Tierra del Fuego
(Argentina). Quaternary International, 239(1–2), 125–134.
Goldberg, P. (1979). Micro-morphology of Pech de L’Azé II sediments. Journal of Archaeological Science,
6(1), 17–47.
Goldberg, P. (2000). Micromorphology and site formation at Die Kelders Cave I, South Africa. Journal of
Human Evolution, 38(1), 43–90.
Goldberg, P. (2001). Some micromorphological aspects of prehistoric cave deposits. Cahiers de Archéologie du CELAT, 10(Série archéometrie No. 1), 161–175.
Goldberg, P. (2003). Some observations on Middle and Upper Paleolithic ashy cave and rockshelter
deposits in the Near East. In A. N. Goring-Morris & A. Belfer-Cohen (Eds.), More than meets the
eye: Studies on Upper Palaeolithic diversity in the Near East (pp. 19–32). Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Goldberg, P., & Bar-Yosef, O. (1998). Site formation processes in Kebara and Hayonim caves and their
significance in Levantine prehistoric caves. In T. Akazawa, K. Aoki, & O. Bar-Yosef (Eds.), Neandertals and modern humans in Western Asia (pp. 107–125). New York: Plenum.
Goldberg, P., & Berna, F. (2010). Micromorphology and context. Quaternary International, 214(1–2), 56–62.
Goldberg, P., & Sherwood, S. C. (2006). Deciphering human prehistory through the geoarcheological study
of cave sediments. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews, 15(1), 20–36.
Goldberg, P., Lev-Yadun, S., & Bar-Yosef, O. (1994). Petrographic thin section of archaeological sediments: A new method for paleobotanical studies. Geoarchaeology, 9(3), 243–257.
Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Xu, Q., & Liu, J. (2001). Site formation processes at Zhoukoudian,
China. Journal of Human Evolution, 41(5), 483–530.
Goldberg, P., Schiegl, S., Meligne, K., Dayton, C., & Conard, N. J. (2003). Micromorphology and site
formation at Hohle Fels Cave, Swabian Jura, Germany. Eiszeitalter Gegenwart, 53, 1–25.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N., et al. (2009). Bedding, hearths, and
site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 1(2), 95–122.
Goldberg, P., Dibble, H., Berna, F., Sandgathe, D., McPherron, S. J. P., & Turq, A. (2012). New evidence
on Neandertal use of fire: Examples from Roc de Marsal and Pech de l’Azé IV. Quaternary International, 247, 325–340.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M. E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., Ben-Nun, A., et al. (2004).
Evidence of hominin control of fire at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Science, 304(5671), 725–727.
Grigor’ev, G. P. (1993). The Kostenki-Avdeevo archaeological culture and the Villendorf-Pavlov-KostenkiAvdeevo cultural unity. In O. Soffer & N. D. Praslov (Eds.), From Kostenki to Clovis: Upper
Paleolithic and Paleo-Indian adaptations (pp. 51–66). New York: Plenum.
Herries, A. I. R. (2009). New approaches for integrating palaeomagnetic and mineral magnetic methods to
answer archaeological and geological questions on Stone Age sites. In A. Fairbairn, S. O’Conner, & B.
Marwick (Eds.), Terra Australis 28—New directions in archaeological science (pp. 235–253). Canberra: Australia National University Press.
Herries, A. I. R., & Fisher, E. C. (2011). Multidimensional GIS modeling of magnetic mineralogy as a
proxy for fire use and spatial patterning: Evidence from the Middle Stone Age bearing sea cave of
Pinnacle Point 13B (Western Cape, South Africa). Journal of Human Evolution, 59(3–4), 306–320.
Herries, A. I. R., Kovacheva, M., Kostadinova, M., & Shaw, J. (2007). Archaeo-directional and -intensity
data from burnt structures at the Thracian site of Halka Bunar (Bulgaria): The effect of magnetic
mineralogy, temperature and atmosphere of heating in antiquity. Physics of the Earth and Planetary
Interiors, 162(3–4), 199–216.
Hiller, J. C., Thompson, T. J. U., Evison, M. P., Chamberlain, A. T., & Wess, T. J. (2003). Bone mineral change
during experimental heating: An X-ray scattering investigation. Biomaterials, 24(28), 5091–5097.
Homsey, L. K., & Capo, R. C. (2006). Integrating geochemistry and micromorphology to interpret feature
use at Dust Cave, a Paleo-Indian through Middle-Archaic site in northwest Alabama. Geoarchaeology,
21(3), 237–269.
Homsey, L. K., & Sherwood, S. C. (2010). Interpretation of prepared clay surfaces at Dust Cave, Alabama.
Ethnoarchaeology, 2(1), 73–98.
James, S. R., Dennell, R. W., Gilbert, A. S., Lewis, H. T., Gowlett, J. A. J., Lynch, T. F., et al. (1989).
Hominid use of fire in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene: A review of the evidence [and comments and
replies]. Current Anthropology, 30(1), 1–26.

664

Mentzer

Karkanas, P. (2001). Site formation processes in Theopetra Cave: A record of climatic change during the
Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene in Thessaly, Greece. Geoarchaeology, 16(4), 373–399.
Karkanas, P. (2002). Micromorphological studies of Greek prehistoric sites: New insights in the interpretation of the archaeological record. Geoarchaeology, 17(3), 237–259.
Karkanas, P. (2007). Identification of lime plaster in prehistory using petrographic methods: A review and
reconsideration of the data on the basis of experimental and case studies. Geoarchaeology, 22(7), 775–
796.
Karkanas, P. (2010). Geology, stratigraphy and site formation processes in the Upper Paleolithic and later
sequence in Kissoura Cave 1. Eurasian Prehistory, 7(2), 15–36.
Karkanas, P., & Goldberg, P. (2010). Site formation processes at Pinnacle Point Cave 13B (Mossel Bay,
Western Cape Province, South Africa): Resolving stratigraphic and depositional complexities with
micromorphology. Journal of Human Evolution, 59(3–4), 256–273.
Karkanas, P., Kyparissi-Apostolika, N., Bar-Yosef, O., & Weiner, S. (1999). Mineral assemblages in
Theopetra, Greece: A framework for understanding diagenesis in a prehistoric cave. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 26(9), 1171–1180.
Karkanas, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., & Weiner, S. (2000). Diagenesis in prehistoric caves: the use of
minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the archaeological record. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 27(10), 915–929.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.-P., Simek, J. F., Albert, R. M., & Weiner, S. (2002). Ash, bones and guano: A study
of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of Grotte XVI, Dordogne, France. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 29(7), 721–732.
Karkanas, P., Koumouzelis, M., Kozlowski, J. K., Sitlivy, V., Sobczyk, K., Berna, F., et al. (2004). The
earliest evidence for clay hearths: Aurignacian features in Klisoura Cave 1, southern Greece. Antiquity,
78(301), 513–525.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A., et al. (2007).
Evidence for habitual use of fire at the end of the Lower Paleolithic: Site-formation processes at Qesem
Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution, 53(2), 197–212.
Kedrowski, B. L., Crass, B. A., Behm, J. A., Luetke, J. C., Nichols, A. L., Moreck, A. M., et al. (2009). GC/
MS analysis of fatty acids from ancient hearth residues at the Swan Point archaeological site.
Archaeometry, 51(1), 110–122.
Kourampas, N., Simpson, I. A., Perera, N., Deraniyagala, S. U., & Wijeyapala, W. H. (2009). Rockshelter
sedimentation in a dynamic tropical landscape: Late Pleistocene–Early Holocene archaeological
deposits in Kitulgala Beli-lena, Southwestern Sri Lanka. Geoarchaeology, 24(6), 677–714.
Lanting, J. N., Aerts-Bijma, A. T., & Van der Plicht, J. (2001). Dating of cremated bones. Radiocarbon, 43
(2A), 249–254.
Latham, A. G., & Herries, A. I. R. (2004). The formation and sedimentary infilling of the Cave of
Hearths and Historic Cave complex, Makapansgat, South Africa. Geoarchaeology, 19(4), 323–
342.
Ligouis, B. (2006). Jais, lignite, charbon et autres matières organiques fossiles: Application de la pétrologie
organique à la’étude des élements de parure et des fragments bruts. In J. Bullinger, D. Leesch, & N.
Plumettaz (Eds.), Le site magdalénian de Monruz, 1. Premiers éléments pour l’analyse d’un habitat de
plein air (pp. 197–216). Neuchâtel: Service et Musée Cantonal d’Archéologie.
Macphail, R., & Crowther, I. (2007). Soil micromorphology, chemistry and magnetic susceptibility studies
at Huizui (Yilou region, Henan province, northern China), with special focus on a typical Yangshao
floor sequence. Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association Bulletin, 27, 103–113.
Macphail, R., & Goldberg, P. (2000). Geoarchaeological investigations of sediments from Gorham’s and
Vanguard Caves, Gibralter: Microstrigraphical (soil micromorphological and chemical) signatures. In
C. B. Stringer, R. N. E. Barton, & J. C. Finlayson (Eds.), Neanderthals on the edge (pp. 183–200).
Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Madella, M., Jones, M. K., Goldberg, P., Goren, Y., & Hovers, E. (2002). The exploitation of plant
resources by Neanderthals in Amud Cave (Israel): The evidence from phytolith studies. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 29(7), 703–719.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F. W., Wood, B. M., & Porter, C. C. (2007). Earth, wind, and fire: Ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza fires. Journal of Archaeological Science, 34(12), 2035–2052.
Mallol, C., Mentzer, S. M., & Wrinn, P. J. (2009). A micromorphological and mineralogical study of site
formation processes at the late Pleistocene site of Obi-Rakhmat, Uzbekistan. Geoarchaeology, 24(5),
548–575.
Mallol, C., Cabanes, D., & Baena, J. (2010). Microstratigraphy and diagenesis at the upper Pleistocene site
of Esquilleu Cave (Cantabria, Spain). Quaternary International, 214(1–2), 70–81.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

665

March, R. J., Baldessari, A., Ferreri, J. C., Grande, A., Gros, E. G., Morello, O., et al. (1989). Étude des
structures de combustion archéologiques d’Argentine. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Française,
86(10/12), 384–392.
March, R. J., Ferreri, J. C., & Guez, C. (1993). Etude des foyers préhistoriques des gisements Magdaleniens
du Bassin Parisien. L’approche experimentale. Memoires du Groupement Archeologique de Seine-etMarne, 1, 87–95.
March, R. J., Muhieddine, M., & Canot, É. (2010). Simulation 3D des structures de combustion préhistoriques. In R. Vernieux & C. Delevoie (Eds.), Actes du Colloque Virtual Retrospect 2009 (pp. 19–29).
Bordeaux: Editions Ausonius.
Matthews, W. (2010). Geoarchaeology and taphonomy of plant remains and microarchaeological
residues in early urban environments in the Ancient Near East. Quaternary International, 214
(1–2), 98–113.
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., & Goldberg, P. (1989). Les structures de combustion moustériennes de la
grotte de Kébara (Mont Carmel, Israël). In M. Olive & Y. Taborin (Eds.), Nature et fonctions des foyers
prehistoriques (pp. 141–146). Nemours: APRAIF.
Meignen, L., Bar Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., & Weiner, S. (2001). Le feu au Paléolithique moyen: recherches
sur les structures de combustion et le statut des foyers. Paleorient, 26(2), 9–22.
Meignen, L., Goldberg, P., & Bar Yosef, O. (2007). The hearths at Kebara Cave and their role in site
formation processes. In O. Bar Yosef & L. Meignen (Eds.), Kebara Cave, Mt. Carmel, Israel: The
middle and upper Paleolithic archaeology, part 1. Cambridge: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology.
Mentzer, S. M. (2009). Bone as a fuel source: The effects of initial fragment size distribution. In I. Théry-Parisot,
S. Costamagno, & A. Henry (Eds.), Gestion des Combustibles au Paleolithique et au Mesolithique:
Nouveaux Outiles, Nouvelles Interpretations. UISPP Proceedings of the XV World Congress (Lisbon,
4–9 September 2006) (pp. 53–64). Oxford: Archaeopress (BAR International Series 1914).
Mentzer, S. M. (2011). Macro- and micro-scale geoarchaeology of Üçağızlı Caves I and II, Hatay, Turkey.
Unpublished dissertation, School of Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Mentzer, S. M., & Quade, J. (in press). Short contribution: Compositional and isotopic analytical methods
in archaeological micromorphology. Geoarchaeology, in press.
Miller, C., & Sievers, C. (2012). An experimental micromorphological investigation of bedding construction in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science, 39(10),
3039–3051.
Miller, C., Conard, N. J., Goldberg, P., & Berna, F. (2009). Dumping, sweeping and trampling: Experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically modified combustion features. P@lethnologie, 2009, 25–37.
O’Connell, J. F. (1987). Alyawara site structure and its archaeological implications. American Antiquity, 52
(1), 74–108.
Parr, J. F. (2006). Effect of fire on phytolith coloration. Geoarchaeology, 21(2), 171–185.
Pastó, I., Allué, E., & Vallverdú, J. (2000). Mousterian hearths at Abric Romaní, Catalonia (Spain). In C. B.
Stringer, R. N. E. Barton, & J. C. Finlayson (Eds.), Neanderthals on the edge: Papers from a
conference marking the 150th anniversary of the Forbes’ Quarry discovery, Gibraltar (pp. 59–67).
Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Perlès, C. (1981). Hearth and home in the Old Stone Age. Natural History, 90, 38–41.
Quivira, M. P., & Dillehay, T. D. (1988). Monte Verde, South-Central Chile: Stratigraphy, climate change,
and human settlement. Geoarchaeology, 3(3), 177–191.
Regev, L., Poduska, K. M., Addadi, L., Weiner, S., & Boaretto, E. (2010). Distinguishing between calcites
formed by different mechanisms using infrared spectrometry: Archaeological applications. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 37(12), 3022–3029.
Rigaud, J.-P., Simek, J. F., & Gé, T. (1995). Mousterian fires from Grotte XVI (Dordogne, France).
Antiquity, 69, 902–912.
Roebroeks, W., & Villa, P. (2011). On the earliest evidence for habitual use of fire in Europe. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(13), 5209–5214.
Rogers, K. D., & Daniels, P. (2002). An X-ray diffraction study of the effects of heat treatment on bone
mineral microstructure. Biomaterials, 23(12), 2577–2585.
Sandgathe, D. M., Dibble, H. L., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S. P., Turq, A., & Niven, L. (2011). On the role
of fire in Neanderthal adaptations in Western Europe: Evidence from Pech de l’Azé IV and Roc de
Marsal, France. PaleoAnthropology, 2011, 216–242.
Schiegl, S., & Conard, N. J. (2006). The Middle Stone Age sediments at Sibudu: Results from FTIR
spectroscopy and microscopic analyses. Southern African Humanities, 18(1), 149–172.

666

Mentzer

Schiegl, S., Lev-Yadun, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Goresy, A. E., & Weiner, S. (1994). Siliceous aggregates from
prehistoric wood ash: A major component of sediments in Kebara and Hayonim caves (Israel). Israel
Journal of Earth Sciences, 43(3–4), 257–278.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., & Weiner, S. (1996). Ash deposits in Hayonim and Kebara Caves,
Israel: Macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science, 23, 763–781.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Pfretzschner, H.-U., & Conard, N. J. (2003). Paleolithic burnt bone horizons from
the Swabian Jura: Distinguishing between in situ fireplaces and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology, 18
(5), 541–565.
Shahack-Gross, R., & Ayalon, A. (2012). Stable carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of wood ash: an
experimental study with archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science. doi:10.1016/
j.jas.2012.06.036.
Shahack-Gross, R., & Finkelstein, I. (2008). Subsistence practices in an arid environment: A geoarchaeological investigation in an Iron Age site, the Negev Highlands, Israel. Journal of Archaeological
Science, 35(4), 965–982.
Shahack-Gross, R., Bar-Yosef, O., & Weiner, S. (1997). Black-coloured bones in Hayonim Cave, Israel:
Differentiating between burning and oxide staining. Journal of Archaeological Science, 24(5), 439–446.
Shahack-Gross, R., Marshall, F., Ryan, K., & Weiner, S. (2004). Reconstruction of spatial organization in
abandoned Maasai settlements: Implications for site structure in the Pastoral Neolithic of East Africa.
Journal of Archaeological Science, 31(10), 1395–1411.
Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Goldberg, P., Goren, Y., Ofek, B., Rabinovich, R., et al. (2008).
Formation processes of cemented features in karstic cave sites revealed using stable oxygen and
carbon isotopic analyses: A case study at middle paleolithic Amud Cave, Israel. Geoarchaeology, 23(1), 43–62.
Sherwood, S. C. (2001). The geoarchaeology of Dust Cave: A late Paleoindian through middle Archaic site
in the western middle Tennessee River valley. Unpublished dissertation, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville.
Sherwood, S. (2008). Increasing the resolution of cave archaeology: Micromorphology and the classification of burned deposits at dust cave. In D. Dye (Ed.), Cave archaeology in the Eastern Woodlands:
Papers in honor of Patty Jo Watson. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Sherwood, S. C., & Chapman, J. (2005). The identification and potential significance of early Holocene
prepared clay surfaces: Examples from Dust Cave and Icehouse Bottom. Southeastern Archaeology, 24
(1), 70–82.
Sherwood, S. C., Driskell, B. N., Randall, A. R., & Meeks, S. (2004). Chronology and stratigraphy at Dust
Cave, Alabama. American Antiquity, 69(3), 533–554.
Shipman, P., Foster, G., & Schoeninger, M. (1984). Burnt bones and teeth: An experimental study of color,
morphology, crystal structure and shrinkage. Journal of Archaeological Science, 11(4), 307–325.
Simms, S. R. (1988). The archaeological structure of a Bedouin camp. Journal of Archaeological Science,
15(2), 197–211.
Simpson, I. A., Vésteinsson, O., Adderley, W. P., & McGovern, T. H. (2003). Fuel resource utilization in
landscapes of settlement. Journal of Archaeological Science, 30, 1401–1420.
Speth, J. D. (2006). Housekeeping, Neandertal-style: Hearth placement and midden formation in Kebara
Cave (Israel). In E. Hovers & S. L. Kuhn (Eds.), Transitions before the transition: Evolution and
stability in the Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age (pp. 171–188). New York: Springer.
Speth, J. D., Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., & Goldberg, P. (2012). Spatial organization of Middle Paleolithic
occupation X in Kebara Cave (Israel): Concentrations of animal bones. Quaternary International, 247,
85–102.
Squires, K. E., Thompson, T. J. U., Islam, M., & Chamberlain, A. (2011). The application of histomorphometry and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy to the analysis of early Anglo-Saxon burned bone.
Journal of Archaeological Science, 38, 2399–2409.
Stevenson, M. G. (1985). The formation of artifact assemblages at workshop/habitation sites: Models from
Peace Point in Northern Alberta. American Antiquity, 50(1), 63–81.
Stevenson, M. G. (1991). Beyond the formation of hearth-associated artifact assemblages. In E. M. Kroll & T. D.
Price (Eds.), The interpretation of archaeological spatial patterning (pp. 269–299). New York: Plenum.
Stewart, B. A., Dewar, G. I., Morley, M. W., Inglis, R. H., Wheeler, M., Jacobs, Z., et al. (2012).
Afromontane foragers of the Late Pleistocene: Site formation, chronology and occupational pulsing
at Melikane Rockshelter, Lesotho. Quaternary International. doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2011.11.028.
Stiner, M., Kuhn, S., Weiner, S., & Bar-Yosef, O. (1995). Differential burning, recrystallization, and
fragmentation of archaeological bone. Journal of Archaeological Science, 22, 223–237.

Microarchaeological Approaches…Combustion Features

667

Stiner, M. C., Barkai, R., & Gopher, A. (2011). Hearth-side socioeconomics, hunting and paleocology during the late Lower Paleolithic at Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution, 60
(2), 213–233.
Surovell, T. A., & Stiner, M. C. (2001). Standardizing infra-red measures of bone mineral crystallinity: An
experimental approach. Journal of Archaeological Science, 28(6), 633–642.
Taylor, G. H., Teichmüller, M., Davis, A., Diessel, C. F. K., Littke, R., & Robert, P. (1998). Organic
petrology. Berlin: Gebrüder Bornträger.
Théry, I., Gril, J., Vernet, J. L., Meignen, L., & Maury, J. (1996). Coal used for fuel at two prehistoric sites
in southern France: Les Canalettes (Mousterian) and Les Usclades (Mesolithic). Journal of Archaeological Science, 23(4), 509–512.
Théry-Parisot, I. (2002). Fuel management (bone and wood) during the Lower Aurignacian in the Pataud
Rock Shelter (Lower Palaeolithic, Les Eyzies de Tayac, Dordogne, France). Contribution of experimentation. Journal of Archaeological Science, 29(12), 1415–1421.
Théry-Parisot, I., Costamagno, S., Brugal, J. P., Fosse, P., & Guilbert, R. (2005). The use of bone as fuel
during the Palaeolithic, experimental study of bone combustible properties. In J. Mulville & A. K.
Outram (Eds.), The zooarchaeology of fats, oils, milk and dairying. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., & Chrzavzez, J. (2010). Anthracology and taphonomy, from wood gathering
to charcoal analysis. A review of the taphonomic processes modifying charcoal assemblages, in
archaeological contexts. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 291, 142–153.
Thompson, T. J. U., Gauthier, M., & Islam, M. (2009). The application of a new method of Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy to the analysis of burned bone. Journal of Archaeological Science, 36,
910–914.
Tsartsidou, G., Lev-Yadun, L., Albert, R. M., Miller-Rosen, A., Efstratiou, N., & Weiner, S. (2007). The
phytolith archaeological record: Strengths and weaknesses evaluated based on quantitative modern
reference collections from Greece. Journal of Archaeological Science, 34(8), 1262–1275.
Tsatskin, A., & Nadel, D. (2003). Formation processes at the Ohalo II submerged prehistoric campsite,
Israel, inferred from soil micromorphology and magnetic susceptibility studies. Geoarchaeology, 18
(4), 409–432.
Ulery, A. L., Graham, R. C., & Amrhein, C. (1993). Wood-ash composition and soil pH following intense
burning. Soil Science, 156(5), 358–364.
Vallverdu, J. (2002). Micromorfología de las facies sedimentarias de la colección de referencia de la Sierra
de Atapuerca y del nivel J del AbricRomaní. Implicaciones geoarqueológicas y paleoetnográficas.
Unpublished dissertation, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona.
Vallverdú, J., Alluué, E., Bischoff, J. L., Cáceres, I., Carbonell, E., Cebria, A., et al. (2005). Short human
occupations in the Middle Palaeolithic level I of the Abric Romaní rock-shelter (Capellades, Barcelona,
Spain). Journal of Human Evolution, 48(2), 157–174.
Vallverdú, J., Alonso, S., Bargalló, A., Bartrolí, R., Campeny, G., Carrancho, Á., et al. (2012). Combustion
structures of archaeological level O and Mousterian activity areas with use of fire at the Abric Romaní
rockshelter (NE Iberian Peninsula). Quaternary International, 247, 313–324.
Vallverdú, J., Vaquero, M., Cáceres, I., Allué, E., Rosell, J., Saladié, P., et al. (2010). Sleeping activity area
within the site structure of Archaic human groups: Evidence from Abric Romaní Level N combustion
activity areas. Current Anthropology, 51(1), 137–145.
van der Veen, M. (2007). Formation processes of desiccated and carbonized plant remains—The identification of routine practice. Journal of Archaeological Science, 34, 968–990.
Vandiver, P. B., Soffer, O., Klima, B., & Svoboda, J. I. (1989). The origins of ceramic technology at Dolni
Vestonice, Czechoslovakia. Science, 246(4933), 1002–1008.
Vaquero, M., & Pastó, I. (2001). The definition of spatial units in Middle Palaeolithic Sites: The hearthrelated assemblages. Journal of Archaeological Science, 28(11), 1209–1220.
Villagran, X. S., Giannini, P. C. F., & DeBlasis, P. (2009). Archaeofacies analysis: Using depositional
attributes to identify anthropic processes of deposition in a monumental shell mound of Santa Catarina
State, southern Brazil. Geoarchaeology, 24(3), 311–335.
Villagran, X., Balbo, A., Madella, M., Vila, A., & Estevez, J. (2011a). Stratigraphic and spatial variability
in shell middens: Microfacies identification at the ethnohistoric site Tunel VII (Tierra del Fuego,
Argentina). Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 3(4), 357–378.
Villagran, X. S., Balbo, A. L., Madella, M., Vila, A., & Estevez, J. (2011b). Experimental micromorphology in Tierra del Fuego (Argentina): Building a reference collection for the study of shell middens in
cold climates. Journal of Archaeological Science, 38(3), 588–604.
Wadley, L. (2010). Cemented ash as a receptacle or work surface for ochre powder production at Sibudu,
South Africa, 58,000 years ago. Journal of Archaeological Science, 37(10), 2397–2406.

668

Mentzer

Wadley, L. (2012). Some combustion features at Sibudu, South Africa, between 65,000 and 58,000 years
ago. Quaternary International, 247, 341–349.
Wadley, L., Sievers, C., Bamford, M., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., & Miller, C. (2011). Middle Stone
Age bedding construction and settlement patterns at Sibudu, South Africa. Science, 334, 1388–
1391.
Wattez, J. (1988). Contribution à la conaissance des foyers préhistoriques par l’étude des cendres. Bulletin
de la Société Prehistorique de France, 85(10–12), 353–366.
Wattez, J. (1992). Dynamique de formation des structures de combustion de la fin du Paléolitique au
Néolitique moyen. Unpublished dissertation, Université de Paris I, Paris.
Wattez, J. (1994). Micromorphologie des foyers d’Etoilles, de Pincevent et de Verberie: Le milieu naturel et
son exploitation. In Y. Taborin (Ed.), Environments et Habitats Magdaleniens dans le Centre du Bassin
Parisien (pp. 120–127). Documents d’Archéologie Française 43, Paris.
Weiner, S. (2010). Microarchaeology: Beyond the visible archaeological record. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., & Bar-Yosef, O. (1993). Bone preservation in Kebara cave, Israel using on-site
Fourier transform infrared spectrometry. Journal of Archaeological Science, 20, 613–627.
Weiner, S., Xu, Q., Goldberg, P., Liu, J., & Bar-Yosef, O. (1998). Evidence for the use of fire at
Zhoukoudian, China. Science, 281(5374), 251–253.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., & Bar-Yosef, O. (2002). Three-dimensional distribution of minerals in the
sediments of Hayonim Cave, Israel: Diagenetic processes and archaeological implications. Journal
of Archaeological Science, 29, 1289–1308.
Wrangham, R. W. (2007). The cooking enigma. In P. S. Ungar (Ed.), Evolution of the human diet: The
known, the unknown, and the unknowable (pp. 308–323). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wrangham, R. W. (2010). Catching fire: How cooking made us human. New York: Basic Books.
Wrangham, R., & Carmody, R. (2010). Human adaptation to the control of fire. Evolutionary Anthropology:
Issues, News, and Reviews, 19(5), 187–199.
Wrangham, R. W., Jones, J. H., Laden, G., Pilbeam, D., & Conklin-Brittain, N. (1999). The raw and the
stolen: Cooking and the ecology of human origins. Current Anthropology, 40(5), 567–594.
Yellen, J. (1977). Archaeological approaches to the present. New York: Academic.
Zerboni, A. (2011). Micromorphology reveals in situ Mesolithic living floors and archaeological features in
multiphase sites in central Sudan. Geoarchaeology, 26(3), 365–391.

