World Archaeology

ISSN: 0043-8243 (Print) 1470-1375 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rwar20

Pleistocene occupation of New Guinea's highland
and subalpine environments
Andrew S. Fairbairn , Geoffrey S. Hope & Glenn R. Summerhayes
To cite this article: Andrew S. Fairbairn , Geoffrey S. Hope & Glenn R. Summerhayes (2006)
Pleistocene occupation of New Guinea's highland and subalpine environments, World Archaeology,
38:3, 371-386, DOI: 10.1080/00438240600813293
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00438240600813293

Published online: 18 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 216

View related articles

Citing articles: 40 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rwar20

Pleistocene occupation of New Guinea’s
highland and subalpine environments
Andrew S. Fairbairn, Geoffrey S. Hope and
Glenn R. Summerhayes

Abstract
New Guinea’s mountains provide an important case study for understanding early modern human
environmental adaptability and early developments leading to agriculture. Evidence is presented
showing that human colonization pre-dated 35ka (ka ¼ thousands of uncalibrated radiocarbon years
before present) and was accompanied by landscape modiﬁcation using ﬁre. Sorties into the subalpine
zone may have occurred before the Late Glacial Maximum (LGM), and perhaps contributed to
megafaunal extinction. Humans persisted in the intermontane valleys through the LGM and
expanded rapidly into the subalpine on climatic warming, when burning and clearance may have
retarded vegetation re-colonization. Plant food use dates from at least 31ka, conﬁrming that some of
New Guinea’s distinctive agricultural practices date to the earliest millennia of human presence.

Keywords
Mountains; archaeology; archaeobotany; palynology; extinction; Late Glacial Maximum.

Introduction
The vast island of New Guinea, split between Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Indonesia,
has a high mountainous spine rising above 4000m along its length and to over 5000m at
Mt Jaya (Fig. 1). Archaeological research suggests that New Guinea was colonized by at
least 40–50ka, when sea level was 200m lower than today (Fig. 1) and New Guinea formed
the northern part of Sahul, the single prehistoric landmass containing Australia and New
Guinea. In this account we discuss published and new evidence for the Pleistocene
occupation of the highland (700–3000m) and subalpine (3000–4000m) zones of New
Guinea’s mountains, focusing on developing human-environment relations between c. 40
and 10ka. Most archaeological research has understandably focused on the prehistory of
the intermontane valleys at c. 1400–1800m altitude in which independent agriculture
World Archaeology Vol. 38(3): 371–386 Archaeology at Altitude
ª 2006 Taylor & Francis ISSN 0043-8243 print/1470-1375 online
DOI: 10.1080/00438240600813293

372

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Figure 1 New Guinea showing the location of key sites mentioned in the text.

developed during the Holocene (Denham et al. 2003). The twentieth-century European
discovery of these densely populated valleys with warlike societies based on intensive root
cropping and pig rearing (Sillitoe et al. 2002) greatly inﬂuenced Western conceptions of
New Guinea’s mountain people. Yet anthropology records societies that have adapted to
New Guinea’s montane environments in a wide variety of ways and, at the same
altitudinal zone as highland agriculturalists, other groups are found with sparse
populations reliant on hunting and gathering/tending plants of uncertain domestic status.
Occupation and economic exploitation also extended well above the intermontane valleys
for settlement, hunting and communication, the latter using mountain passes as high as
4600m on Mt Carstenz (Hope and Hope 1976a). Sparse archaeological research makes
montane New Guinea’s early prehistory a diﬃcult subject area, but its importance goes
well beyond regional archaeological discourses, providing key information about the
adaptive ability of early modern humans. This is because human colonization of Sahul
required the earliest known open ocean crossings and expansion into the highlands
confronted newcomers with totally unfamiliar biota in a range of environments inﬂuenced
by extreme climatic gradients.

Vegetation and climate
New Guinea’s mountains form a steep east-west barrier, dissected by deep valley systems
(Fig. 1), with a cool, moist and thermally equable climate. Local variations in climate
punctuate regional temperature and rainfall gradients. Frost is common above c. 2500m,
providing an eﬀective barrier to root cropping. Temperature declines with increasing

Pleistocene occupation

373

altitude, for example reaching an average of 198C at c. 1580m in the Wahgi Valley
(Hughes et al. 1991), 88C at 3480m and 68C at 4380m on Mt Wilhelm (Hnatiuk et al.
1976). Precipitation is generally high with annual rainfall from the same locations of
2700mm, 3450mm and 2900mm.
Five broad vegetation types are found (Table 1) varying in composition, physiognomy
(structure) and altitude, depending on changing climate and landform. Floristically diverse
broadleaf forests cover the highlands from 700 to 3000m. Oaks (Lithocarpus and
Castanopsis) are key elements of the lower-lying forests with southern beech (Nothofagus)
and Gymnosperms (e.g. Dacrydium, Podocarpus and Papuacedrus) important in the mid
and upper zones. Alluvial swamps and bogs are found extensively in some intermontane
valley ﬂoors and vegetation everywhere is modiﬁed by human activity, perhaps most
obviously in gardens, but also forming widespread grasslands dominated by species of
Miscanthus and Imperata. The subalpine zone is characterized by low-growing, ﬂoristically
poor forests, rich in shrubs (e.g. Ericaceae) and tree-ferns (e.g. Cythaea), with grasslands at
higher altitudes and extensive bogs. Above the tree line at c. 3800m, the alpine zone
contains low-growing grassland with shrubs such as Leucopogon, which give way to glacial
environments above 4600m.

Chronology, rate and direction of colonization
Humans appeared in Sahul by at least 40–50ka (O’Connor and Chappell 2003; O’Connell
and Allen 2004). Among the key evidence in New Guinea are luminescence dates of
444ka for occupation on the raised coral terraces of the Huon peninsula (Fig. 1) and
evidence of expansion into the Bismarck Archipelago by c. 40ka at the cave of Buang
Merabak (O’Connell and Allen 2004). AMS dates from recent excavations by the authors
at Kosipe Mission in the Papuan highlands (1950m: see Fig. 2) provide a terminus ante
quem of 35,049 + 670 BP (Wk-17901) for human habitation, based on dates from hearths

Table 1 Major vegetation types of New Guinea’s mountain landscape zones following terminology
used in the text, with modern altitudinal range and key plant taxa

Zone

Vegetation
type

Alt. range
(m)

Vegetation
structure

Alpine
Subalpine

Alpine
Subalpine

43800
3000–4000

Highland

Upper montane

2700–3200

Mid-montane

1500–3000

Grassland
Forest/shrub
grassland
Moss/cloud
forests
Forests

Lower montane

Sources: Paijmans 1976; Johns 1982

700–2000

Forests

Key plants
Festuca, Poa, Leucopogon
Ericaceae, Dacrycarpus,
Cyathea, Poa
Dacrycarpus, Papuacedrus,
Amaracarpus
Nothofagus, Weinmannia,
Dacrydium
Lithocarpus, Castanopsis,
Araucaria

374

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Figure 2 Sites in the Kosipe valley (upper, after Hope 1982) with detail of the Kosipe Mission
(lower).

Pleistocene occupation

375

associated with stone tools. A cluster of new dates at c. 30–32ka and those published earlier
(White et al. 1970) suggest that Kosipe was regularly visited before 35ka until about 16ka
and then through the Holocene. Occupied from c. 25ka, Nombe rockshelter (c. 1720m) has
the only other contemporary occupation, which lasted into the Holocene (Mountain 1993;
Evans and Mountain 2005). ‘Generalized correlation’ has been used to estimate the solar
age of these sites at c. 30,000 cal. BP (see Evans and Mountain 2005); a similar estimation
would put Kosipe’s earliest occupation at c. 40,000 cal. BP. Taken at face value the dates
suggest a temporal lag in expansion to the montane zone from the lowlands of c. 5000 years,
whether compared directly to the Buang Merabak radiocarbon dates or the 444ka Huon
date, assuming that the 35ka Kosipe radiocarbon dates represent c. 40,000 solar years.
Subalpine occupation is less well known, but appears to have lagged signiﬁcantly behind
the highlands. Data from Nombe suggest hunters exploited animals from higher altitude
environments after 25ka, though this may reﬂect closer proximity of natural grasslands and
the large fauna they sustained. Microcharcoal records from Ijomba and Laravita Tarn (see
below) provide the earliest strong evidence of a subalpine presence.
Can we say anything about the initial direction and extent of the Pleistocene human
presence? The most parsimonious colonization route is from the south and Australia
contained contemporary or earlier populations in its tropical woodlands (Kershaw et al.
2002). Early occupation is known to the north, in both the Huon and Bismarck
Archipelago, but direct colonization by that route would have required crossing the high
passes. An alternative is colonization from the north via circumnavigation of Papuan
lowlands. The paucity of Pleistocene sites, the chronological unevenness of ﬁre records and
clear absence of ﬁring in some areas before 20ka suggest that the earliest occupation in the
highlands was relatively sparse, sporadic and uneven. Human impact and disturbance
clearly increased after c. 20ka and increased in intensity towards the terminal Pleistocene,
perhaps reﬂecting increasing populations and the early stages of independent agricultural
development (Haberle et al. 2001; Haberle 2003; Denham et al. 2003). Before this, some
locations, such as Kosipe, were repeatedly visited from the earliest times; other areas saw
habitation only later, such as Nombe and probably Tari (see below). Kosipe’s abridged
archaeological record, with superimposed and temporally distinct patches of ﬁreplaces,
tools and food residues is suggestive of a temporary encampment, perhaps reﬂecting a
population with high residential mobility (see Denham and Barton 2006), as suggested for
the early phase at Nombe (Mountain 1993).

Environment of ﬁrst colonization
What plant communities met the ﬁrst colonists as they ascended from the costal lowlands?
Vegetation reconstructions for the period 48–26ka can be made based on long pollen
records at Tari (Haberle 1998), Sirunki (Walker and Flenley 1979), Lake Hordorli (Hope
1996) and Kosipe (Hope 1982, unpublished), as well as those from northern Australia
(Kershaw et al. 2002). Climate in the main highland valleys was perhaps 48C cooler than
today, as they were densely covered in Nothofagus forests to c. 2500m, a vegetation
type today found at higher elevations. The position of the alpine tree line is unknown
but may have been 2700–3000m while glaciers were probably present above 4200m.

376

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Subalpine shrub grasslands seem to have occupied the zone now taken by subalpine forest
(Hope 1996). The lower boundary to mixed lower montane forest is also not well known
but may have lain below 1400m. Although the highland sites are uniformly moist, it is
likely that the lowlands were somewhat drier than today. Savannah may have extended
closer to the foot of the mountains and a zone of dry-season forest typiﬁed by deciduous
trees was probably well developed in the foothills.

Vegetation change and ﬁre
Humans have had a signiﬁcant impact on montane vegetation through clearance, burning,
translocation of plants and cultivation, and altering populations of grazers/browsers
through hunting and pig rearing. Fire is a major human inﬂuence on New Guinea’s
montane zone, used to clear and maintain both gardens and grassland areas.
Microcharcoal accumulation at Kosipe from core A, located 1km from the Mission site
in Kosipe Swamp (Fig. 2), shows phases of forest burning and clearance before 36ka
(36,500 + 400 BP (OZE-451)) (Fig. 3). A similar record has been found 433ka at Wamena
in the Balim (Hope 1998) (see Fig. 4). Records of vegetation burning pre-date 30ka at
Kosipe and the Balim, but were these related to human or natural causes? The highland
zone is analytically useful when trying to disentangle ﬁre causality in Sahul. In the
lowlands, ﬁre may have aﬀected New Guinea’s savannah and large swathes of Australia
naturally before human occupation. Claims that humans were responsible for landscape
burning before 40ka (e.g. Turney et al. 2001) and in doing so were responsible for animal
extinctions in Australia (Miller et al. 2005) are compelling, but remain fringed with doubt.
Early ﬁres at Kosipe Swamp occurred in a moist mid to upper montane Nothofagus and
Elaeocarpus forest of limited combustibility and unlikely to have supported natural ﬁres.
Recent studies of microcharcoal, pollen and phytolith data (festucoid grasses) from nearby
terrestrial sediments also indicate that the forest was being burnt and that clearings were
being maintained within it. Vegetation burning does not correspond with any major
climatic events, but the new Kosipe dates show that humans were present during the early
phase of ﬁring and, in the absence of any other feasible cause, we are left in little doubt
that humans were responsible for vegetation burning before 35ka.
While evidence from Kosipe and the Balim shows pre-30ka ﬁres, other sites, such as
Haea Swamp and Lake Hordorli, record no ﬁres at all for several millennia with a sudden
appearance at c. 20ka (Fig. 4), probably indicating the appearance of humans in the area
(Haberle et al. 2001). The Tari pollen record is of great importance for understanding
long-term sequences of vegetation change as it is the only one that preserves a continuous
sequence from before 28ka through to the present (Haberle 1998). It shows that, at c.
21,000 BP, in forests dominated by Nothofagus, Castanopsis and Myrtaceae, burning led to
the creation of a grassland and forest mosaic. Although there is no direct archaeological
evidence for a local human presence, the vegetation change and increase in burning is
unprecedented and is considered to be a consequence of the arrival of humans in the
region (ibid.). Increasing vegetation disturbance and burning is also evidenced in
the Wahgi Valley from c. 20,000 BP through to the Holocene and has been identiﬁed as
the Pleistocene genesis of a unique Holocene agricultural landscape (Haberle 2003).

Pleistocene occupation

377

Figure 3 Microcharcoal inﬂux at Kosipe.

Several palaeoecological records show that ﬁre appeared in the subalpine with
post-glacial warming. For example, at Lake Habbema, north of Mt Trikora, ﬁre and
open grasslands were present by the start of the Holocene, and pollen diagrams

378

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Figure 4 Microcharcoal records from highland and subalpine New Guinea (after Haberle et al. 2001).

(Hope unpublished) show continuing disturbance to the present day. Ijomba, on Mt Jaya,
sees ﬁring at 11.5ka that reaches a peak in the mid-Holocene. Laravita Tarn, at 3680m on
Mt Albert Edward, shows burning in alpine grasslands at 11ka followed by limited
development of subalpine forest after 10ka which was removed by burning after c. 7ka
(Hope unpublished data). Once again, humans are the only viable cause for such
widespread and continuous burning. Evidence suggests that exploitation of the subalpine
occurred as soon as occupation was viable following glacial retreat. The Laravita sequence
may even indicate that post-glacial vegetation re-colonization was impeded by human
action, as seen in other parts of the world (Roberts 2002). Records are, however, mixed as
some subalpine areas experienced clearance only within the last millennium, associated
with rising limits to agriculture (Corlett 1984) and some areas appear to have been largely
ignored – a core from a glacial pond at 3540m on remote Mt Scorpio showed only one ﬁre
event in a 12,500 year record (Hope 1980).

Plant-based subsistence
New Guinea’s mountains have a dearth of wild plant food resources. One exception is the
tree-crop Pandanus, several species of which are cultivated and grow wild between

Pleistocene occupation

379

c. 1800m and 3100m (Bourke 1996) and produce a seasonal bounty of nutritious seeds (see
Powell in Paijmans 1976: 116–17). Other edible nut trees, mostly occurring today below
2000m, include several Elaeocarpus species and the widespread Castanopsis and
Lithocarpus acorn-bearing species. In the subalpine zone there are no staple plant
resources, although fruits such as Astelia alpina, Podocarpus amarus or Rubus spp. are
reasonably common. Fern shoots and some sedge and Potentilla spp. root stocks are eaten
by pigs in the subalpine but are not recorded as human food today, although they may
have been eaten in the past.
The character and development of Pleistocene plant-based subsistence activities has
been starved of archaeological evidence. Peter White ﬁrst suggested that seasonal
settlement at Kosipe was attracted by the abundance of wild edible Pandanus in the area
(White et al. 1970), a suggestion supported by abundant archaeological Pandanus remains
directly dated to 30,575 + 399 BP (Wk-17261) and 30,727 + 395 BP (Wk-18233). Singleseeded Pandanus drupe fragments closely resemble P. brosimos and P. iwen. Pandanus
remains post-date the earliest signs of a human presence and further work is required to
establish if its use was a late and potentially local development or accompanied colonists
and thus involved transfer of gathering knowledge from lowlands area where Pandanus is
common (Haberle 1995). The Kosipe data conﬁrm the potential importance of Pandanus
as an early food resource, extend greatly direct evidence for the antiquity of its use
(Denham 2005), and suggest that some of New Guinea’s distinctive highland agricultural
practices derive from the early millennia of human colonization. When combined with the
presence of waisted axes, which may have been used to clear vegetation (Groube 1989),
and traces of vegetation clearing and ﬁring (see above), it is tempting to envisage a
Pandanus management system similar to that seen today.

Hunting and extinctions
Hunting is a key economic and social activity that almost certainly accompanied the
ﬁrst colonists, and which, before the introduction of pig, provided the only source of
animal nutrition. Early hunters may have exploited a strange fauna, which included
several large and now extinct mammals (Flannery et al. 2002). New Guinea seems always
to have lacked some families of marsupials found in Australia, but has a rich possum and
rodent fauna, of which the folivorous possums (e.g. Pseudocheirus cupreus) and large rats
(e.g. Mallomys rothschildii) are commonly hunted today. The large monotreme Zaglossus
bruijnii is reasonably common up to the subalpine, but hunting pressures have caused local
extinction. Small kangaroos are found in forests and subalpine grasslands, with rodents
particularly common in the subalpine. Birds are quite common throughout the discussed
range, from larger species such as cassowary and ground pigeons to small frugivorous
birds and grassland specialists such as quail. Larger mammalian predators, other
than introduced dogs, are lacking, their niche being ﬁlled by pythons and large birds of
prey.
Direct zooarchaeological data of the details of hunting behaviour are scant. The best
early evidence comes from Nombe (Mountain 1993), used as a temporary shelter from
c. 25ka from which time large mammals were targeted. By 14.5ka there was a shift towards

380

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

targeting small and medium animals which coincided with more intensive occupation of
the shelter. Now extinct species were hunted before 14.5ka and hunting appears to have
extended into the upper montane forest and subalpine grassland zones, which would have
lain close to the site during the cold of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Burnt animal
bone fragments from a charcoal lens dated to 25,217 + 293 BP (Wk-17898) at Kosipe were
beyond identiﬁcation but also suggest hunting.
Few other direct archaeological data concerning animal exploitation are available
before the LGM. While the recovered fossil and zooarchaeological data are very sparse,
there has clearly been attrition of the native fauna during the Pleistocene, in many cases
linked to human activity. The age and scale of human impact continues to be debated, but
the methods of human impact seem clear: reduction of animal numbers by hunting and
change of environment by burning and clearing. New Guinea’s pre-human montane fauna
is known from several fossil sites in the central highlands that contain bones of extinct
taxa, such as large kangaroos (Protemnodon spp.) and diprotodontids (e.g. Hulitherium
thomasettii) (Menzies and Ballard 1994; Flannery 1995). The sites are poorly dated but
megafauna were possibly present until c. 35ka. No settlement evidence is forthcoming
from this region contemporary with the last megafauna, and, while Kosipe lies at some
remove from the central highlands, its new dates suggest that contemporary human
occupation was feasible.
Kelangurr Cave (2850m asl), New Guinea’s highest altitude megafaunal site, near
Kwiyawagi on the West Balim River, has the earliest evidence linking humans and
animal extinction. Among the fauna that accumulated until c. 30ka were the now
extinct diprotodontid marsupial Maokopia ronaldii and the thickset kangaroo Thylogale
hopeii, both adapted to the subalpine grasslands. The remains have no association with
human artefacts (Hope et al. 1993). However, human intervention via landscape
burning is apparent from around 33ka in the same catchment (Balim Valley) as the
fossils (Hope 1998). A stronger case for human interaction is seen at Nombe, where
now extinct megafauna occur just before human appearance at c. 25ka (Flannery et al.
1983). Other animals disappear from the Nombe sequence over the following millennia,
including the marsupial wolf (Thylacinus cyanocephalus) (Mountain 1993). Evidence of
human impact and animal extinction continues to accelerate into the Holocene, for
example at Mapala rockshelter (3960m asl) (Hope and Hope 1976a), where hunting
from 5.5ka resulted in the extinction of a small wallaby (Thylogale christensenii).
Extinction of the same animal is dated to c. 3.5ka at another high altitude (3650m asl)
rockshelter near Kwiyawagi. Hunting pressure on small kangaroo and folivorous
rodents allowed the copper ringtail possum (Pseudocheirus cupreus) to expand into the
subalpine niche (Hope et al. 1993).
These Late Pleistocene and Holocene extinctions post-date the development of large
human populations at lower altitudes and were almost certainly the result of human
action. While direct evidence for human impact is weak, disappearance of the larger
subalpine fauna occurred well before the climate warmed after 14ka, at which time forest
limits rose and the mountain grasslands diminished. These expanded grasslands should
have been favourable to the grassland adapted fauna, but the larger grazers failed to
survive. Hence a non-climatic cause must have been involved and human hunting or
disturbance is plausible.

Pleistocene occupation

381

Humans and the LGM
The LGM was a period of climatic deterioration that saw depression of the tree line
below 2500m at Sirunki from c. 26,000–17,000 BP, after which the climate ameliorated
and the tree line ascended the mountains again (Walker and Flenley 1979). Prentice
et al. (2005) report evidence for a glacial advance early in the period and a later advance
around 17ka, followed by a full retreat by 15ka. At maximum, ice covered about
2200km2 and alpine grasslands about 50,000km2 of the island’s spine. At Kosipe, the
swamp record shows that subalpine herbs were present between 30 and 15ka, perhaps
representing minor development of a frost-hardy herb ﬁeld at the LGM. Lower down at
1200–1800m in the Wahgi, Tari and Telefomin valleys, vegetation was less radically
aﬀected and a forest of beech (Nothofagus) remained through the LGM (Hope and
Haberle 2005).
Though evidence is sparse, it is clear that occupation continued throughout the LGM at
Nombe (Evans and Mountain 2005) and in the intermontane valleys at Telefomin (1430m)
(Hope 1983) and Tari (Haberle 1998). It is probable that the limit of regular human
habitation was pushed below 2500m, but this remains speculative. Current data are too
poor to know whether higher altitude sites such as Kosipe were abandoned during this
period. Several highland sites become occupied soon after LGM (Denham 2005) and
evidence discussed above suggests that human impact in the subalpine zone post-dates the
LGM. An earlier occupation of this zone is suggested on the basis of the disappearing
megafauna, but, since the timings of the extinctions and extent of human presence are
unknown, it is unclear whether the large marsupials had already succumbed by the time
the LGM arrived.

Discussion
Though there are gaping holes in the archaeological and palaeoenvironmental records,
research indicates a sustained human presence in the highland zone of New Guinea
before 35ka. Rapid colonization from the lowlands suggests that adaptation to montane
conditions was not a signiﬁcant problem for early Sahul populations. If microcharcoal
evidence is accepted as indicative of human activity – and we see no plausible
alternative – humans were present and actively managing environments across New
Guinea during the Pleistocene, even at the higher altitudes. Disappearance of grasslandadapted faunas is a pointer to pre-LGM use of the subalpine, but this remains to be
archaeologically veriﬁed. Settlement continuity is suggested in the highland zone, with
populations in higher altitudes withdrawing below 2000m during the LGM. The end of
LGM conditions saw increasing exploitation of the subalpine areas towards the end of
the Pleistocene, probably for hunting and communication as in the present day, and
there is clear evidence of sustained human impact on some high altitude locations from
that time. Indeed, vegetation in some areas of the high-altitude zone may have been
aﬀected from the start of the Postglacial by burning in an upward extension of intensive
landscape management which appears by 20ka and had its roots in the earliest phase of
highland occupation.

382

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

The antiquity of human presence and environmental impact in the region is striking. In
few other areas of the world can be demonstrated such an early signal of deliberate human
landscape modiﬁcation and early impact on fauna, though more evidence is required to
prove the latter. Evidence suggests that humans came to the highlands with the knowledge
and technology to open up its forests by burning and probably the use of axes. This
implies the population could plan and initiate actions with full knowledge of their
probable environmental outcomes. It also suggests that early modern humans could
actively adapt new and unfamiliar environments to their purposes from at least 35ka as
well as modify their behaviour to those environments. Hominids have been able to control
ﬁre for several hundred thousand years (Goren-Inbar et al. 2004), though the earliest
claims of deliberate use of ﬁre as a landscape modiﬁcation tool before their appearance in
Sahul remain weak (McBrearty and Brooks 2000; Rolland 2004). The Kosipe evidence
provides, at before 35ka, the earliest strong evidence for deliberate landscape modiﬁcation
by humans. Nowhere else can such close spatial and temporal evidence be found of a
contemporary presence of both ﬁre-aﬀected vegetation and human activity at this date in
an environment where natural ﬁre is unlikely.
Vegetation burning and evidence of early Pandanus use at Kosipe also indicate that
some of New Guinea’s modern agricultural practices had ancient antecedents. The data
push back the threshold of pre-agricultural plant use, by 10–15,000 years, conﬁrming
longstanding suspicions of the importance of Pandanus to early settlers. Conﬁrmation of
early plant-food management, the most probable reason for burning, requires further
supporting data, but the Kosipe data do make such management plausible from the
start of human presence in highland Sahul, as suggested by several accounts (e.g.
Groube 1989; Denham and Barton 2006). Pandanus seeds would have provided a
predictable and storable seasonal crop, perhaps used in permanent settlement or, more
plausibly, occupation with high residential mobility (e.g. Evans and Mountain 2005;
Denham and Barton 2006). Pandanus utilization by mobile groups would have allowed
more frequent use of a wider altitudinal range than available to agriculturalists.
Development of garden crops may have radically altered occupation patterns and
landscape use, marginalizing the subalpine and upper montane zones where ﬁeld crops
could not grow, and conceptually separating those areas from the more amenable lower
altitude slopes.
Unfortunately the patchiness of the data prevents an integrated understanding of
changing occupation and landscape use of any single region over the timescale covered
here. Archaeological and palaeoecological records of highland and subapline New Guinea
remain relatively sparse and further research is necessary to test the speculative
interpretations discussed here. In particular, the higher altitude areas have yet to be
systematically explored, despite the widespread occurrence of rockshelters in many
mountain areas; the question of the early use of these areas postulated thirty years ago
(Hope and Hope 1976b) remains to be tested. Exploitation of both the major mountain
zones described here has important bearing on understanding human adaptability globally
and the local development of agriculture. However, the relatively high altitude of Kosipe
emphasizes the point that pre-agricultural strategies were not tied to any particular
altitudinal range, so that records of early settlement may very well be found away from the
modern major centres of population.

Pleistocene occupation

383

Acknowledgements
Geoﬀrey Hope thanks Tim Flannery, Jack Golson, Paul Gorecki, Simon Haberle, MaryJane Mountain, Jim Peterson, Mike Prentice and Peter White for their support, encouragement, advice and ﬁeldwork companionship over recent decades. Andrew Fairbairn
thanks Tim Denham for useful discussion. Research at Kosipe was funded by the
Department of Anthropology, University of Otago and Department of Archaeology &
Natural History, Australian National University. The research committee of Central
Province, Sacre Coeur Mission, Kosipe Village, National Research Institute and National
Museum and Art Gallery of Papua New Guinea facilitated the Kosipe research, especially
Jim Robins and Herman Mandui.

Andrew S. Fairbairn,
School of Social Science, The University of Queensland,
a.fairbairn@uq.edu.au
Geoﬀrey S. Hope,
Department of Archaeology and Natural History,
Research School of Paciﬁc and Asian Studies,
The Australian National University
Glenn R. Summerhayes,
Department of Anthropology, University of Otago, Dunedin

References
Bourke, R. M. 1996. Edible indigenous nuts in Papua New Guinea. In South Paciﬁc Indigenous Nuts
(eds M. L. Stevens, R. M. Bourke and B. R. Evans). Canberra: Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research, pp. 45–55.
Corlett, R. T. 1984. Human impact on the subalpine vegetation of Mt Wilhelm, Papua New Guinea.
Journal of Ecology, 72: 841–54.
Denham, T. 2005. Agricultural origins and the emergence of rectilinear ditch networks in the
Highlands of New Guinea. In Papuan Pasts: Cultural, Linguistic and Biological Histories of PapuanSpeaking Peoples (eds A. Pawley, R. Attenborough, J. Golson and R. Hide). Canberra: Australian
National University, pp. 329–61.
Denham, T. P. and Barton, H. 2006. The emergence of agriculture in New Guinea: continuity from pre-existing foraging practices. In Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture
(eds D. J. Kennett and B. Winterhalder). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
pp. 237–64.
Denham, T. P., Haberle, S. G., Lentfer, C., Fullagar, R., Field, J., Therin, M., Porch, N. and
Winsborough, B. 2003. Origins of agriculture at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of New Guinea.
Science, 301: 189–93.
Evans, B. and Mountain, M.-J. 2005. Pasin bilong tumbuna: archaeological evidence for early
human activity in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. In Papuan Pasts: Cultural, Linguistic and
Biological Histories of Papuan-Speaking Peoples (eds A. Pawley, R. Attenborough, J. Golson and R.
Hide). Canberra: Australian National University, pp. 363–86.

384

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Flannery, T. F. 1995. Mammals of New Guinea. Sydney: Australian Museum/Reed Books.
Flannery, T. F., Mountain, J. and Aplin, K. 1983. Quaternary kangaroos (Macropodidae:
Marsupialia) from Nombe rock shelter, Papua New Guinea, with comments on the nature of
megafaunal extinction in the New Guinea Highlands. Proceedings of the Linnean Society N.S.W.,
107(2): 75–97.
Flannery, T. F., Long, J., Archer, M. and Hand, S. 2002. Prehistoric Mammals of Australia and
New Guinea: One Hundred Years of Evolution. Sydney: University of New South Wales
Press.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M. E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., Ben-Nun, A. and
Werker, E. 2004. Evidence of Hominin control of ﬁre at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Science, 304:
725–7.
Groube, L. 1989. The taming of the rain forests: a model for late Pleistocene forest exploitation in
New Guinea. In Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation (eds D. R. Harris and
G. C. Hillman). London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 292–304.
Haberle, S. G. 1995. The identiﬁcation of cultivated Pandanus and Colocasia in pollen records and
the implications for the study of early agriculture in New Guinea. Vegetation History and
Archaeobotany, 4: 195–210.
Haberle, S. G. 1998. Late Quaternary vegetation change in the Tari Basin, Papua New Guinea.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 137: 1–24.
Haberle, S. G. 2003. The emergence of an agricultural landscape in the highlands of New Guinea.
Archaeology in Oceania, 38: 149–58.
Haberle, S. G., Hope, G. S. and van der Kaars, S. 2001. Biomass burning in Indonesia and Papua
New Guinea: natural and human induced ﬁre events in the fossil record. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 171: 259–68.
Hnatiuk, R. J., Smith, J. M. B. and McVean, D. M. 1976. The Climate of Mt. Wilhelm. Canberra:
Australian National University.
Hope, G. S. 1980. Historical inﬂuences on the New Guinea ﬂora. In Alpine Flora of New Guinea
(ed. P. van Royen). Vaduz: Cramer Verlag, pp. 223–48.
Hope, G. S. 1982. Pollen from archaeological sites. In First Australian Conference on Archaeometry
(eds P. Duerden and W. Ambrose). Canberra: Australian National University, pp. 211–9.
Hope, G. S. 1983. The vegetation changes of the last 20,000 years at Telefomin, Papua New Guinea.
Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, 4: 25–33.
Hope, G. S. 1996. Quaternary change and historical biogeography of Paciﬁc Islands. In The Origin
and Evolution of Paciﬁc Island Biotas, New Guinea to Eastern Polynesia: Patterns and Process (eds
A. Keast and S. E. Miller). Amsterdam: SPB Publishing, pp. 165–90.
Hope, G. S. 1998. Early ﬁre and forest change in the Baliem Valley, Irian Jaya, Indonesia. Journal of
Biogeography, 25: 453–61.
Hope, G. S. and Haberle, S. G. 2005. The history of the human landscapes of New Guinea.
In Papuan Pasts: Cultural, Linguistic and Biological Histories of Papuan-Speaking Peoples
(eds A. Pawley, R. Attenborough, J. Golson and R. Hide). Canberra: Australian National
University, pp. 541–54.
Hope, G. S. and Hope, J. H. 1976a. Man on Mt Jaya. In The Equatorial Glaciers of New Guinea
(eds G. S. Hope, J. A. Peterson, U. Radok and I. Allison). Rotterdam: A. A. Balkema,
pp. 225–38.
Hope, G. S., Flannery, T. F. and Boeardi, N. 1993. A preliminary report of changing Quaternary
mammal faunas in subalpine New Guinea. Quaternary Research, 40: 117–26.

Pleistocene occupation

385

Hope, J. H. and Hope, G. S. 1976b. Palaeoenvironments for man in New Guinea. In The Origins of
the Australians (eds R. L. Kirk and A. Thorne). Canberra: Institute of Aboriginal Studies, pp. 29–53.
Hughes, P. J., Sullivan, M. E. and Yok, D. 1991. Human-induced erosion in a highlands catchment
in Papua New Guinea: the prehistoric and contemporary records. Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie, 83:
227–39.
Johns, R. J. 1982. Plant zonation. In Biogeography and Ecology of New Guinea (ed. J. L. Gressitt).
The Hague: Junk, pp. 309–31.
Kershaw, A. P., Bush, M. B., Hope, G. S., Weiss, K-F., Goldammer, J. G. and Sanford, R. 1997.
The contribution of humans to past biomass burning in the tropics. In Sediment Records of Biomass
Burning and Global Change (eds J. S. Clark, H. Cachier, J. G. Goldammer and B. Stocks). Berlin:
Springer Verlag, pp. 413–42.
McBrearty, S. and Brooks, A. S. 2000. The revolution that wasn’t: a new interpretation of the
evolution of modern human behaviour. Journal of Human Evolution, 39: 453–563.
Menzies, J. I. and Ballard, C. 1994. Some new records of Pleistocene megafauna from New Guinea.
Science in New Guinea, 20: 113–39.
Miller, G. H., Fogel, M. L., Magee, J. W., Gagan, M. K., Clarke, S. J. and Johnson, B. J. 2005.
Ecosystem collapse in Pleistocene Australia and a human role in megafaunal extinction. Science, 309:
287–90.
Mountain, M.-J. 1993. Bones, hunting and predation in the Pleistocene of northern Sahul.
In Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia (eds
M. Smith, M. Spriggs and B. Fankhauser). Canberra: Australian National University, pp. 123–30.
O’Connell, J. F. and Allen, F. J. 2004. Dating the colonization of Sahul (Pleistocene Australia-New
Guinea): a review of recent research. Journal of Archaeological Science, 31: 835–53.
O’Connor, S. and Chappell, J. 2003. Colonisation and coastal subsistence in Australia and Papua
New Guinea: diﬀerent timing, diﬀerent modes. In Paciﬁc Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects
(ed. C. Sand). Nouméa: Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15, pp. 15–32.
Paijmans, K. (ed.) 1976. New Guinea Vegetation. Canberra: Australian National University Press.
Prentice, M. L., Hope, G. S., Maryunani, K. and Peterson, J. A. 2005. An evaluation of snowline
data across New Guinea during the last major glaciation, and area-based glacier snowlines in the
Mt. Jaya region of Papua, Indonesia, during the Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary International,
138–9: 93–117.
Roberts, N. 2002. Did prehistoric landscape management retard the post-glacial spread of woodland
in Southwest Asia? Antiquity, 76: 1002–10.
Rolland, N. 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic ﬁre a punctuated event? A review
of the Middle Pleistocene record in Eurasia. Asian Perspectives, 43: 248–80.
Sillitoe, P., Stewart, P. J. and Strathern, A. 2002. Horticulture in Papua New Guinea. Pittsburgh, PA:
Ethnology Monographs.
Turney, C. S. M., Kershaw, A. P., Moss, P., Bird, M. I., Fiﬁeld, L. K., Cresswell, R. G., Santos, G. M.,
Di Tada, M. L., Hausladen, P. A. and Zhou, Y. 2001. Redating the onset of burning at Lynch’s Crater
(North Queensland): implications for human settlement in Australia. Journal of Quaternary Science,
16: 767–71.
Walker, D. and Flenley, J. 1979. Late Quaternary vegetational history of the Enga Province of
upland Papua New Guinea. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 286: 265–
344.
White, J. P., Crook, K. A. W. and Ruxton, B. P. 1970. Kosipe: a late Pleistocene site in the Papuan
highlands. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 36: 152–70.

386

Andrew S. Fairbairn et al.

Andrew S. Fairbairn is an archaeobotanist and has worked in Europe, the Near East and
now Oceania, where he is improving archaeobotanical methods for the region. He is
lecturer in archaeology at the University of Queensland, Australia.
Geoﬀrey S. Hope is a geographer, has worked in all parts of New Guinea for over forty
years and is particularly at home above 2000m, where he has made numerous new
discoveries. He is one of the region’s leading palynologists and is Professor of
Biogeography at the Australian National University in Canberra, Australia.
Glenn R. Summerhayes is an expert on Oceanic material sourcing and the Lapita
phenomenon. Working across Papua New Guinea, he is particularly at home on small
Melanesian islands, but enjoys a stroll in the mountains. He is Professor and Head of the
Department of Anthropology at Otago University, New Zealand.

