World Archaeology

ISSN: 0043-8243 (Print) 1470-1375 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rwar20

Shepherds and karst: the use of caves and rockshelters in the Mediterranean region during the
Neolithic
Diego E. Angelucci , Giovanni Boschian , Marta Fontanals , Annaluisa
Pedrotti & Josep Maria Vergès
To cite this article: Diego E. Angelucci , Giovanni Boschian , Marta Fontanals , Annaluisa
Pedrotti & Josep Maria Vergès (2009) Shepherds and karst: the use of caves and rock-shelters
in the Mediterranean region during the Neolithic, World Archaeology, 41:2, 191-214, DOI:
10.1080/00438240902843659
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00438240902843659

Published online: 23 Apr 2009.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 495

View related articles

Citing articles: 63 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rwar20

Shepherds and karst: the use of caves
and rock-shelters in the Mediterranean
region during the Neolithic
Diego E. Angelucci, Giovanni Boschian, Marta Fontanals,
Annaluisa Pedrotti and Josep Maria Vergès

Abstract
Several Neolithic to Iron Age sites of the Mediterranean region contain archaeological sediments,
called fumiers, which are composed mainly of burnt animal dung and vegetal remains, and are
commonly interpreted as the product of pastoral activities. Here we address three main topics about
these sediments, which occur almost exclusively in the entrance areas of karstic caves and rockshelters: their characteristics; methodological aspects of their excavation and study; and their
archaeological interpretation. For such purposes, we brieﬂy review the information available about
Neolithic fumiers and present the ﬁrst data from the sites of El Mirador (Burgos, Spain) and Riparo
Gaban (Trento, Italy).

Keywords
Mediterranean Europe; Neolithic; fumiers; pastoralism; geoarchaeology; soil micromorphology.

Introduction
Karstic cavities are privileged environments where archaeological sediments and features
that are often aﬀected by more or less severe weathering in open-air sites can be preserved.
This is particularly evident for peculiar kinds of deposits that are documented virtually
only in rock-shelters and caves of karstic origin, as in the case of the deposits known as
fumiers. These sediments can be found at sites dating from the Neolithic to the Iron Age,
even if their accumulation in cave and rock-shelters is a process that has continued until
today. Despite the variability of their sedimentary characteristics and the wide geographic
and chronological distribution, fumiers can be considered as a discrete group and the
formation processes that brought them about can be discussed as a whole. They are

World Archaeology

Vol. 41(2): 191–214 The Archaeology of Caves, Shelters and the Deep Karst
ª 2009 Taylor & Francis ISSN 0043-8243 print/1470-1375 online
DOI: 10.1080/00438240902843659

192

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

commonly interpreted as the product of depositional actions and modiﬁcation processes
that are mainly related to animal husbandry, particularly stabling and stock-keeping;
basically, they are made up of (more or less) burnt herbivore dung.
The archaeological relevance of such deposits is remarkable: considering the complex
ecological and cultural factors that may bias the occurrence and distribution of animal
bones in the sites, it can be observed that ‘dung is sounder evidence of the presence of
ﬂocks than sheep bones are’ (Boschian and Montagnari-Kokelj 2000: 347). Nevertheless,
archaeozoological data – if any – corroborate strongly the results of the geoarchaeological
study of these deposits (Boschian and Miracle 2008), as in the case of shed deciduous teeth
(Helmer 1984) that also point to sheep/goat penning in caves.
The aim of this paper is to provide information on the fumiers found around the
Mediterranean region, mainly in Neolithic sites. We review the distribution of the fumiers
in this region, consider their characteristics and the methodological aspects related to their
excavation and study, and discuss their geoarchaeological interpretation. The discussion
starts from the data collected from the sites of El Mirador (Sierra de Atapuerca, Burgos,
Spain) and Riparo Gaban (Trento, Italy), whose study is still in progress.

Fumiers in Mediterranean Europe
Main characteristics of fumier deposits
The group of sediments we are referring to is rather broad and diﬃcult to outline; nonetheless
some basic features that distinguish fumiers as a discrete category of archaeological
sediments can be described. The term fumier is commonly used to designate archaeological
sediments that consist mainly of burnt animal dung. The primary meaning of this French
term is a mix of animal dung and vegetal remains such as straw, leaves, etc., used for manure;
in archaeological contexts, it usually broadly deﬁnes the above-mentioned deposits, and a
full terminological discussion can be found in Brochier (2002: 469–70).
In the ﬁeld, fumiers usually show these characteristics:
. they form complex and usually long, well-bedded successions of thin to very thin
layers (centimetres to millimetres thick);
. the layering is usually sub-horizontal, or follows the topography of bedrock, and
slightly domed or heap-like features are often observed; abrupt terminations and
lateral facies changes are common (see Plate 1 below);
. they are usually organized in alternations between unburned, partially burnt and
burnt layers, forming facies that are clearly recognizable in the ﬁeld, with the layers
organized in groups within sequences; these kinds of successions are often
intercalated with more or less homogeneous sediments, often featuring a rich
artefactual record, interpreted as related to domestic occupations (Goldberg and
Macphail 2006);
. the transition among the facies can be abrupt to gradual and the contrast in colour
is often striking, with peculiar chromatic traits, particularly for burnt layers (‘layer
cake’ appearance: Macphail et al. 1997);
. on average, fumiers contain relatively poor artefact assemblages;

Shepherds and karst

193

. the organic matter and phosphate content is high and, consequently, they are often
aﬀected by bioturbation, both ab antiquo and in recent times.
Concerning the distribution of the fumier deposits, they occur mainly within the
Mediterranean regions of Europe. A ﬁrst non-exhaustive list may include the following
areas and sites (Fig. 1):
. the coastal area and the Pyrenean region in north-eastern Iberia: Cova del Parco
and Cova de la Guineu (Bergadà 1997; Bergadà et al. 2005); Can Sadurnı́ (Blasco
et al. 1999); Santa Maira, Bolumini and Cova de les Cendres (Badal 1999; Verdasco
2001); Cinto Mariano (Cabanilles et al. 2005); Abric de la Falguera (Garcı́a Puchol
and Aura Tortosa 2006; Verdasco 2001); Cova Colomera (Oms et al. 2008); Balma
de la Margineda (Brochier 1995; Brochier and Claustre 1994);
. also in Iberia, the upper Ebro basin and the northern Meseta: Los Husos (Alday
Ruiz et al. 2003; Fernández 2008; Polo Dı́az and Fernández Eraso 2007); El
Mirador (Vergès et al. 2002, 2008);
. southern France: Fontjuvenal (Brochier 1988); Grotte Antonnaire (Argant et al.
1991); Caune de Bélesta (Brochier et al. 1998); Grotte du Gardon (Sordoillet et al.
2008); and others (see Brochier 1983);
. the Liguria region in Italy: Arene Candide (Courty et al. 1989, 1992; Macphail et al.
1997);

Figure 1 Location of the sites mentioned in the text. 1: Cinto Mariano; 2: Abric de la Falguera; 3:
Cova del Parco; 4: Cova de la Guineu; 5: Can Sadurnı́; 6: Santa Maira; 7: Bolumini; 8: Cova de les
Cendres; 9: Cova Colomera; 10: Balma de la Margineda; 11: Los Husos; 12: El Mirador; 13:
Fontjuvenal; 14: Caune de Bélesta; 15: Grotte Antonnaire; 16: Grotte du Gardon; 17: La Grande
Rivoire; 18: Arene Candide; 19: Trieste Karst; 20: Pupićina peć; 21: Vaganacka pećina; 22: Konispol
cave; 23: Grotta Sant’Angelo; 24: Grotta dei Piccioni; 25: Grotta delle Mura; 26: Egolzwil 3; 27:
Arbon Bleiche 3; 28: Riparo Gaban.

194

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

. the eastern peri-Adriatic region: several caves in the Trieste Karst (Boschian and
Montagnari-Kokelj 2000); Pupićina peć (Boschian and Miracle 2008), Vaganacka
pećina (Forenbaher and Vranjican 1985) and others (Miracle and Forenbaher pers.
comm.) in Croatia; Konispol cave in Albania (Schuldenrein 2001);
. the western peri-Adriatic region: Grotta dei Piccioni and Grotta Sant’Angelo, in
Abruzzo (Iaconis and Boschian 2008); Grotta delle Mura, in Apulia (Boschian
unpublished data).
. the Alpine area: Egolzwil 3 (Rasmussen 1989, 1993); Arbon Bleiche 3 (Akeret et al
1999); La Grande Rivoire (Delhon et al. 2008); Riparo Gaban (Bagolini 1980;
Bagolini and Pedrotti 1996).
It is probable that such a distribution is biased by preservation factors – particularly the
distribution of carbonate rocks – and by the development of archaeological research, and
that fumiers occur over a much more extended area.
The chronology of fumier deposits spans the early Neolithic to the Iron Age. In several
sites, fumiers appear at the very onset of the early Neolithic stratiﬁcation, as at El Mirador
and at Riparo Gaban (see below). In most cases, fumiers are considered to be the result of
non-human biogenic inputs originated by human activities, like the stabling and penning
of animals (mostly ﬂocks of ovicaprines and, to a lesser extent, stocks of cattle) within the
entrance areas of caves and rock-shelters. These animals cause the rapid accretion of the
sedimentary surfaces through the accumulation of their dung, while various types of
vegetal material occurring within the sediments derive from several pastoral practices, like
foddering, litter-bedding, fencing, etc.
Whether the pastoral deposits were (periodically) burnt or not after the deposition strongly
aﬀects their sedimentary characteristics and preservation. The fumiers mainly derive from the
combustion or the thermal alteration of the organic residues; in this general framework, there
is a signiﬁcant variety of syn- and post-depositional dynamics responsible for the remarkable
variability of the sedimentary facies of burnt fumiers (see below).
Apparently, there are many fewer facies of unburnt pastoral deposits, both at macroand microscopic scale, and their origin is still a matter of debate (Boschian 2006).
Considering that these are often tightly interﬁngered with the burnt layers, and that it is
not always easy to ascertain their degree of burning (if any), such unburnt deposits may be
accommodated within the fumier category alongside the burnt ones.
Some methodological remarks on the study of fumiers
The high degree of complexity of fumiers has several implications with respect to the
techniques to be employed during their excavation, and to the sampling and analysis of the
sediments.
Fumiers in the ﬁeld
A ﬁrst point deals with the excavation and description of fumiers. They display remarkable
facies variability, which is related not only to depositional events, but also to syn- or postdepositional processes. The complexity observed in fumiers, thus, can have a stratigraphic

Shepherds and karst

195

meaning in terms of the succession of sedimentary events, but it can also be the result of
alteration processes that acted almost contemporaneously with the deposition –
particularly through burning and thermal alteration – or soon after, through other
diagenetic processes such as dissolution, solute migration and precipitation.
For this reason, the ‘classical’ archaeological stratigraphic technique (e.g. Barker 1977;
Harris 1979 and following editions) can hardly be used in the excavation of fumiers,
especially as concerns the deﬁnition of the units. Naming every single level would imply a
‘divisionist’ approach that would have confusing eﬀects when the stratigraphic matrix is
compiled, with thousands of units scattered within a few square metres. Furthermore, due
to the irregular geometry of the stratiﬁcation, any approach based on topographic or
elevation criteria (for example, through arbitrary levels) would not be feasible at all.
If long-term weathering eﬀects are ﬁltered out, much of the variety of fumiers is related
to the spatial change of combustion processes, and to a lesser extent to the spatial
distribution of human (lato sensu) activities. All this can be interpreted conceptually – with
some ﬂavour of mechanicism – as equivalent to variations of sedimentary facies in a
depositional basin. The concept of sedimentary facies seems therefore the most
appropriate to cope with the complexity of fumiers. In the following paragraphs, the
lithofacies, as deﬁned by Moore (1949), will be used as the conceptual and methodological
basis appropriate to deal with the excavation, description and interpretation of fumiers.
The stratiﬁcation of El Mirador was excavated and sampled by means of excavation
complexes, the criteria for their formalization being the existence of surfaces recognizable
over the whole excavation area. Each complex was subdivided into lithofacies according to
the sedimentary characteristics recognizable in the ﬁeld, and all the lithofacies were
excavated individually and three-dimensionally mapped. At Riparo Gaban, the lithofacies
method was employed to describe and sample the stratigraphic remnant (see below).
Fumiers in the laboratory
The understanding of formation processes in an archaeological context needs a careful
interdisciplinary approach based on excellent ﬁeldwork procedures and extensive
laboratory analyses, focused on the questions raised during ﬁeldwork and post-excavation
data elaboration. This is particularly true for fumiers, whose polygenetic composition and
complex formation have challenged archaeologists for a long time, while, still today, many
questions on their origin are under debate.
Fumiers usually contain poor assemblages of cultural remains (lithics and pottery) and
the faunal remains are also scant. Conversely, the by-products of stabling (coprolites and
the associate spherulites) and botanical remains (charred wood and seeds, ash, phytoliths,
etc.) are common or even dominant. Therefore, the thorough sieving and ﬂotation of all
units and facies, as well as their systematic sampling, is particularly important to achieve a
good representation of the eco-factual assemblages preserved.
Among the available geoarchaeological techniques, soil micromorphology is probably the
most useful tool for the explanation of the formation processes of fumiers. The study of
micromorphological thin sections has been critical (see, among others, Brochier 1983;
Courty et al. 1992; Macphail et al. 1997; Boschian and Montagnari-Kokelj 2000) in the
recognition of their nature as deposits originated by the burning of animal dung deposited by

196

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

stabled ﬂocks. Soil micromorphology will be employed here as the basic technique in the
study of the fumiers, in addition to other analytical methods. The description of thin sections
presented below is in accordance with Bullock et al. (1985) and Stoops (2003).
Recent work on pastoral cave contexts has highlighted the importance of the integration
of botanical (Cabanes et al. 2007; Delhon et al. 2008) and archaeozoological data
(Boschian and Miracle 2008) in the interpretation of fumiers as indicators of cave and
landscape use by Neolithic shepherds/pastoralists. This aspect cannot be absolutely
discarded, as vegetals and animals are strictly interconnected within the pastoral economy.
The future application of FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy and microscopy will probably
be an asset in understanding the complex mineralogy of these deposits. Archaeomagnetic
studies have also been applied, not only for the reconstruction of secular series, but also to
discriminate primarily and secondarily burnt layers (Carrancho et al. 2006).

El Mirador
Site presentation
El Mirador (42820’58’’ N; 003830’33’’ W; 1033m altitude) is a cave site located in the Sierra
de Atapuerca (Burgos, Spain), a low relief rising over the northern Meseta at short
distance from the Bureba corridor, which connects the Atlantic and the Mediterranean
slopes of the Iberian peninsula (Zazo et al. 1983). The Atapuerca sites are well known for
the important Pleistocene archaeological and palaeontological record recovered since the
1970s (e.g. Arsuaga et al. 1997; Bermúdez de Castro et al. 1999; Carbonell et al. 2008).
The inﬁlling of El Mirador had never been systematically investigated in the past;
ﬁeldwork started in 1999 with the opening of a trench that brought to light an
unexpectedly well-preserved Holocene succession, whose bottom was reached in 2005. The
excavation is now exploring Pleistocene layers.
The cave is situated along the southern slope of the Sierra de Atapuerca, in Upper
Cretaceous brecciated limestone. The cave entrance measures approximately 23 x 15m and
has a maximum height of some 5m (Fig. 2). The test trench was dug near the entrance and
crossed a more than 5m-thick Holocene succession that includes two main archaeological
sequences: a 3.5m-thick early to late Neolithic stratiﬁcation and a Bronze Age one. They are
mostly composed of fumier showing little or no post-depositional modiﬁcations, with
excellent preservation of features, artefacts and ecofacts (Plate 1; see also Vergès et al. 2008).
An archaeologically sterile bed lies between the Neolithic and the Bronze Age layers.
The Holocene sequence of El Mirador was divided into twenty-four stratigraphic
complexes, whose chronology is based on a set of twenty radiocarbon dates so far (Table 1
and Fig. 3; Vergès et al. 2002, 2008; Cáceres et al. 2007). The Neolithic and Bronze Age
sequences were excavated using sedimentary facies as operative units; a list of the deﬁned
facies is given in Table 2.
Formation processes of the Holocene succession at El Mirador
The sedimentary characteristics observed in the Holocene sequence of El Mirador indicate
that natural inputs were limited to a few limestone fragments fallen from the cave roof and

Shepherds and karst

197

Plate 1 El Mirador: picture of the upper part of the Holocene succession, east wall of test trench,
2001 ﬁeld campaign (scale: 1m; picture: Equipo de Investigación de Atapuerca).

Figure 2 El Mirador: schematic plan and proﬁle of the cave entrance. The shaded area corresponds
to the area excavated up to 2008.

198

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Table 1 El Mirador: synthesis of the succession (1991–2008 ﬁeld campaigns; dating after Vergès et al.
2002, 2008; Cáceres et al. 2007)

Unit(s)

Main characteristics

MIR1
MIR2

Surface layer
Inﬁlling of burrows
penetrating into units
MIR4 and MIR5
Partly disturbed
archaeological sediment
In situ archaeological
stratiﬁcation (mainly fumiers)
Collective burial reworking
early Bronze Age human remains
Weakly organic clayey silt, with
poor granular structure, few
ﬁnds and common microfaunal
remains
Densely stratiﬁed sequence of fumiers,
mainly formed of clayey silt with few
limestone fragments and abundant
products of ﬁre activity (ash, charcoal,
burnt excrements and fragments
of burnt sediment), organized in thin
discontinuous juxtaposed layers, often
with evidence of in situ thermal alteration.
Slope sediment reworking pre-existing
deposits, lying upon an angular
unconformity.
Calcareous breccias with two ﬁne
intercalated layers.

MIR3
MIR4
MIR4A
MIR5

MIR6 – MIR23

MIR24

MIR50 – MIR53

Attribution

Dating
(14C BP)

Sub-recent

Middle and late
Bronze Age

Early to late
Neolithic

3040 + 40 to
3400 + 40
3670 + 40 to
3900 + 40

4780 + 40 to
6320 + 50

7060 + 40/
6110 + 40
Upper
Palaeolithic

to the occasional inwash of ﬁne material from the slope; conversely, the bulk of the
sedimentation was anthropogenic, both directly and indirectly.
The deposition rate of the Neolithic sequence was 1mm/year on average, reaching peaks
of some 15mm/year between units MIR16 and MIR11. This accumulation is remarkably
high if compared to unit MIR5, whose deposition rate is about 0.1mm/year (and, in fact,
represents a hiatus in the Holocene human occupation of El Mirador). This rate is higher
still if we take into account that fumier volume reduction during combustion is estimated
at 90 to 97 per cent of the original volume (Brochier 1991; Shahack-Gross et al. 2005).
Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that more parameters should be considered in the
estimation of the deposition rate, like the size of the ﬂocks and the duration and frequency
of their visits to the cave; moreover, periodic cleansing of the central part of the cave,
which has been observed in the Italian Karst (Boschian and Montagnari-Kokelj 2000),
may have been an important factor in the reduction of the rates in some sites, or during
some periods within a sequence. In the ﬁeld, the alternation of unburned (as facies d, t or

Shepherds and karst

199

Figure 3 El Mirador: cross-section of the Holocene sequence, south wall of test trench. 1: squares; 2:
unit names; 3: unit boundaries; 4: facies boundaries; 5: top of Pleistocene succession; 6: charcoal
accumulations; 7: ash accumulations (distinct facies); 8: ash layers; 9: burnt sediment (rubefaction);
10: limestone fragments; 11: potsherds; 12: lithic artefacts; 13: bones; 14: sub-actual burrows; 15:
ancient burrows.

v; see Table 2) and burnt facies (facies b, g or c) is clearly visible. The burnt facies are often
arranged in cyclical sequences: ashy layers (facies b, g or m) lie upon accumulations of
charcoal (facies c) that rest on thermally altered sediments (facies -r) or upon organic
layers (facies o). In other areas of the site, clayey facies (facies t or v/vl) alternate with
unburned or incompletely burnt accumulations of excrements (facies d).

200

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Table 2 El Mirador: list of the lithofacies identiﬁed in the Holocene series
Name

Short description

a

Yellowish brown clayey silt, with few to common unsorted calcareous stones, common
organic matter, high porosity; it contains common ash and scarce microcharcoal
fragments dispersed in the matrix
Accumulations of ash, almost pure; sometimes contains charcoal fragments or
yellowish small mottles; occasionally shows ﬁne parallel lamination
Ash accumulations with intermediate characteristics between facies b and facies g
Accumulations of mm- to cm-sized vegetal charcoal fragments
Very dark grey, granular, organic sediment formed of scarcely or moderately
decomposed animal excrements, sometimes welded together
Fine layers of white to light gray ash with preserved ﬁbres with horizontal, parallel or
perpendicular, orientation pattern
Light gray silt, massive, with abundant ash dispersed in the matrix
Greenish silt, with abundant dispersed ash
Light brown, massive (sometimes granular) accumulations of ash, containing mm-sized
fragments of charcoal and reddened sediment
Accumulation of organic matter, very dark grey to black, with massive structure and
absence of recognizable excrements at the naked eye
Bioturbated parts
Clayey silt, reddish brown burnt sediment, with granular structure
Strongly deformed or broken ashy sediment, with heterogeneous characteristics
Dark greyish brown clay, with parallel or weakly wavy lamination and pseudomorphs
of vegetal ﬁbres preserved in between the laminae
Silt with abundant ash and varied colour, sometimes with platy structure and moderate
cementation
3- to 5-cm-thick layers of clayey loam, massive (facies v) or with parallel lamination, with
intercalations of orange layers with ﬁbrous or granular structure containing
recognizable digested bones and coprolites (facies vl)
Suﬃx used for presence of lamination
Suﬃx used for presence of reddening

b
bg
c
d
f
g
i
m
o
p
q
s
t
tf
v/vl

-l
-r

On a microscopic scale, facies g and bg appear as mainly formed of coprolites, with a
variable degree of structure preservation. Faecal spherulites are widespread in the
groundmass and phytoliths are common, as conﬁrmed by archaeobotanical analysis
(Cabanes et al. 2007), and occasional detrital grains are present (Plate 2a and 2b). The
porosity is usually high, giving the sediment a fairly open structure, even if clearly
recognizable coprolites are scarce. These facies derive from the burning of animal dung
and are widespread in fumiers (see, e.g., Rasmussen 1993 or Brochier et al. 1992 among

"
Plate 2 El Mirador: microphotos of the Holocene archaeological sequence: (a) facies bg: note the
partly recognizable coprolitic structure, the moderate porosity and the presence of detrital grains
(unit MIR4; PPL – plane polarized light); (b) as (a) but XPL (cross-polarized light): note the
spherulites dispersed within the groundmass; (c) facies f, made up of parallel-oriented chains of
phytoliths (unit MIR4, PPL); (d) details of (c); (e) facies a, showing granular aggregation (unit
MIR6, PPL); (f) same as (e) but XPL; (g) facies vl, with clearly recognizable parallel lamination (unit
MIR6, PPL); (h) facies c, made up of charcoal fragments in situ (unit MIR4, PPL).

Shepherds and karst

201

202

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

others; at Arene Candide they were named as ‘ashed coprolite-rich layer’: Macphail et al.
1997).
Facies b contains more or less the same components as facies bg and g but with a higher
proportion of ash derived from vegetal material. Some of the b facies are made almost
exclusively of wood ash, with variable enrichments of micrite in the ﬁne material; others
display an intimate mixing of ash with coprolites or faecal spherulites, probably caused by
trampling or other syn- or post-depositional modiﬁcations. Archaeobotanical data match
the micromorphological information, as they indicate that facies b includes less phytoliths
and spherulites than facies g (Cabanes et al. 2007). These data reinforce the preliminary
ﬁeld explanation of the origin of this facies, interpreted as the result of the combustion of
mainly vegetal material. This kind of facies is also common in fumier stratiﬁcation
(compare with the ‘wood ash layer’ described by Macphail et al. 1997).
The ash-rich facies (b, bg and g) are ‘classical’ deposits of burnt fumiers. The case of
facies f is diﬀerent: in the ﬁeld, it is formed of thin, 1mm-thick layers of whitish ash with
still recognizable vegetal ﬁbres that display a sub-perpendicular orientation pattern. This
facies was interpreted in the ﬁeld as being the result of in situ combustion of material like
straw. Under the microscope, it is seen to be formed exclusively of continuous chains of
phytoliths and other vegetal residues (Plate 2c and 2d). Palaeobotanical analyses have
shown that the phytoliths are mainly of husk; they were interpreted as being the result of
crop-processing practices (Cabanes et al. 2007). Nonetheless, facies f may correspond to
stabling (or even foddering) beds made up with straw after the cereal grains had been
extracted, a practice that is still common today among shepherds. At Arene Candide,
similar deposits were interpreted as possible matted surfaces over the ground (Macphail
et al. 1997).
Less clear is the origin of facies a, a more or less homogeneous clayey silt (Table 2). In
thin section, it shows the same components as other facies (spherulites, ash, phytoliths,
charcoal, etc.) even if less common and mixed with ﬁne clay material. The constituents are
randomly dispersed in the groundmass, which displays microgranular aggregation (Plate
2e and 2f). The homogeneous and unlayered deposits, mostly made up of spherulites,
phytoliths and other components, have been interpreted in various ways: they may be the
product of the weathering and trampling of unburnt or partially burnt fumiers (Boschian
2006) or the result of patchy combustion of the droppings (Brochier 2002); whichever their
origin, their components show that they must be ascribed to pastoral activities. It must
also be pointed out that they always occur in association with typical fumier beds,
although some fumier sequences (e.g. the Abruzzo ones, see Iaconis and Boschian 2008) do
not include such homogeneous layers.
Among the unburned fumiers, facies vl represents a case of complex origin. In the ﬁeld
and under the microscope (Plate 2g), this facies displays ﬁne sub-parallel laminations
composed of biogenic (spherulites and phytoliths dispersed in the groundmass, but no
coprolites) and geogenic material (silt- to sand-sized detrital grains). The fabric is dense,
and the porosity low, the latter made up of ﬁne sub-horizontal vughs; mottling due to the
precipitation of Fe-Mn (hydro)oxides is common. This facies may be interpreted as the
result of short-distance reworking of animal dung over the surface of the site during
stabling; its compaction and the lamination are probably related to trampling, while the
hydromorphic features demonstrate the circulation of water and other liquids through the

Shepherds and karst

203

sediment, probably during deposition. Facies vl resembles the ‘veritable fumier’ mentioned
by Brochier (2002).
Riparo Gaban
Site presentation
Riparo Gaban (Trento, Italy) is a rock-shelter ﬁlled up by a c. 7m-thick prehistoric
succession spanning from the Mesolithic to the Bronze Age. The site (46805’36’’ N;
011807’21’’ E; 270m altitude) is located near Trento, along the eastern ﬂank of the glaciereroded valley of River Adige, which has deeply incised the Trentino’s Pre-Alps. The shelter
opens under a low cliﬀ of well-stratiﬁed Jurassic nodular limestone. The cliﬀ is oriented
eastwards and borders a small dry valley possibly related to late glacial ﬂuvial erosion
(Balista 1977) and drained by a sinkhole situated at the foot of the shelter’s wall.
Riparo Gaban was excavated in the 1970s–80s under the direction of B. Bagolini, who left a
c. 2m2-wide remnant for sampling and analyses (Fig. 4 and Plate 3; see Bagolini 1980;
Bagolini and Pedrotti 1996). Its archaeological sequence includes: Mesolithic strata with the
classical southern Alpine chrono-cultural sequence of Sauveterrian and Castelnovian
horizons (Kozlowski and Dalmeri 2002); an early to middle Neolithic succession, with rich
archaeological assemblages upon which the early Neolithic Gaban cultural group was
deﬁned; Copper Age layers, which preserve evidence of metallurgical activities; and one of
the most complete early–middle Bronze Age sequences of the Alpine arc, as far as its chronocultural sequence is concerned (Bagolini and Pedrotti 1996). The units identiﬁed during
ﬁeldwork, their chronology and cultural aﬃliation are reported in Table 3.
The succession preserved in the stratigraphic remnant of Riparo Gaban
The geoarchaeological study of Riparo Gaban started with the description and sampling
of the remnant (Plate 3), whose study gives information on the diachronic aspect of site
formation but no data on the spatial organization of the site, which will be available in the
future, thanks to ongoing ﬁeldwork.

Figure 4 Riparo Gaban: schematic plan of the excavated area, with location of the excavation sectors
and of the stratigraphic remnant (courtesy F. Cavulli).

204

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Plate 3 Riparo Gaban: view of the stratigraphic remnant (left) and geaorchaeological ﬁeldwork
(right).

In the ﬁeld, the succession preserved in the remnant clearly shows its polygenetic origin.
The Mesolithic part is formed of a relatively homogeneous succession of silty layers often
enriched in ashes, with variable amount of limestone fragments. The Neolithic part
contains sequences of discontinuous ‘layer-cake’ levels, merging laterally into silty, ashrich sediment or, in other sectors of the shelter, to occupation layers (Plate 4). Fumier
facies embedded in a more or less homogeneous silty deposit also can be found in the
upper part of the stratiﬁcation, dating to the Copper and Bronze Ages.
The lithofacies method was used to describe and sample the Neolithic stratiﬁcation. The
letters used to name the facies (see Table 4) diﬀer from those used at El Mirador. Twenty
thin sections were cured from undisturbed monoliths collected from the Mesolithic and

Shepherds and karst

205

Table 3 Riparo Gaban: archaeological stratigraphy (data after Bagolini and Pedrotti 1996;
Kozlowski and Dalmeri 2002)
Period (cultural attribution)

Dating (14C

3410 + 45 (layer A5)

D1–D10

Middle Bronze Age
Late early Bronze Age (cf. Fiave III culture)
Early Bronze Age (Polada culture)
Late Copper Age – beginning of Bronze Age
Copper Age
Beginning of middle Neolithic
(Square Mouth Pottery)
Early Neolithic (Gaban group)

E1–E6, FA

Late Mesolithic (Castelnovian)

FB–FC

Early Mesolithic (Sauveterrian)

Units
A1–A5
A6–A10
B1–B6
C1–C3
C4–C6
D0

BP)

3800 + 60 (layer B5a2)
3950 + 50 (layer C5b2)

6030 + 45 (layer D2)
5990 + 45 (layer D8-2)
7971 + 42 (layer FA) to
6968 + 41 (layer E)
8847 + 57 (layer F16) to
8193 + 66 (layer FB)

Neolithic layers, representing almost all the units and facies (more samples, particularly
from the upper part of the stratiﬁcation, are under study with the collaboration of Daniela
Anesin and Monia Zannini).
Under the microscope, anthropogenic and biogenic components are clearly dominant,
the latter being in fact related to indirect human inputs. The geogenic inputs are variable
but never dominant: among these, limestone or speleothems fragments coming from the
shelter wall are usual occurrences, as also are fragments of igneous or metamorphic rocks
inwashed from the outside, together with occasional fragments of reworked soils
(‘pedorelicts’, Brewer 1976). In all the observed samples, the ﬁne material includes
signiﬁcant quantities of ﬁnely dispersed amorphous organic matter, deriving from the
incorporation in the sediment of by-products of anthropic or biological activities.
The components of the Neolithic sediment derive mostly from the burning of vegetal
matter (charcoal, ash and phytoliths), together with animal dung (coprolites and
spherulites); bone, burnt bone, lithic artefacts, pottery shards and clods of burnt sediment
are also common. Phytoliths were observed inside coprolites, and are systematically
associated with spherulites, indicating that they mostly derive from herbivore dung. No
unburned fumier facies were detected within the Neolithic succession so far. Three main
microfacies were identiﬁed under the microscope:
. Coprolite microfacies are formed of well-recognizable burnt and ashed herbivore
excrements. Well-preserved coprolites or fragments of coprolites are present and
contain vegetal remains (often phytoliths forming connected chains), spherulites and
occasional silt-sized mineral grains. The porosity is usually high.
. Ash microfacies are composed of ash accumulations deriving from the burning of
vegetal material at various temperatures, usually high, and in an oxidizing
environment. Depending on the temperature reached during the process, the ash
may be composed of calcite monocrystals pseudomorphic on calcium oxalate or of
micrite aggregates with the same shape.

206

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Plate 4 Riparo Gaban: detail of the Mesolithic (labels ‘1’ and ‘E’) to Neolithic (label ‘5’) transition.
Early Neolithic burnt layers are easily recognizable (picture by D. Anesin, 2008).

. Granular microfacies consist of material with microgranular aggregation, with a
variable degree of compaction and porosity. The groundmass is usually made up of
coprolite fragments, together with dispersed or chaotically clustered spherulites or
phytoliths, and ash, in various proportions. Finely dispersed amorphous organic
matter is usually common within the ﬁne fraction.
These three microfacies often display more or less intense syn- and post-depositional
modiﬁcations, such as: destructuration or homogenization due to natural and anthropic
processes; compaction due to trampling; formation of platy microstructure and the
development of pedofeatures (segregation or silt capping) related to cyclical frost. The postdepositional modiﬁcations are even more intense in the Copper and Bronze Age layers, where
primary fumier microfacies are almost unrecognizable (D. Anesin pers. comm. 2008).

Shepherds and karst

207

Table 4 Riparo Gaban: list of the identiﬁed lithofacies
Name

Short description

a

White or very light grey thin ash layers, massive or with ﬁne parallel lamination, often
overlying reddened (facies –r) horizons
Silty loam, brown to greyish brown, massive, non-cemented, with abundant dispersed ash
Silty grey to light grey layers with abundant dispersed ash, usually massive and
moderately cemented by carbonates, sometimes containing a little microcharcoal
Suﬃx used for calcium carbonate cementation
Pinkish grey to light brown silty loam layers, massive or with ﬁne poorly developed
blocky subangular aggregation, with abundant dispersed ash
Thin organic layers, dark grey or dark brown, massive, non-cemented, with frequent ash
and microcharcoal, sometimes discontinuously cemented
Suﬃx used for the occurrence of lamination
Suﬃx used for reddening

b
g
-k
p
n
-l
-r

The Mesolithic layers include residues originating from the burning of vegetal matter,
and their microfacies are rather diﬀerent from those of the Neolithic sediments. Ash
accumulations made up of micritic aggregates with regular cube- or lozenge-shaped
crystalline habits were detected. These crystals are interpreted as being the result of the
burning and re-liming of calcium oxalate that occurs as organic waste in wood, leaves,
bark and other vegetal tissues (Courty and Wattez 1987; Schiegl et al. 1996). These ashes
are common all over the sequence and form the bulk of the Mesolithic deposit; they are
mixed with variable amounts of limestone angular fragments deriving from the shattering
of the roof and with minerals and rock fragments coming from the outside.

Discussion
Fumiers are peculiar archaeological sediments that need to be approached with an
interdisciplinary perspective and a speciﬁc methodology. Fumier accumulations are typical
polygenetic deposits, as they include a wide range of geogenic, biogenic (both faunal and
ﬂoral) and anthropogenic materials. However, the human inputs, both direct and indirect,
are predominant and, among prehistoric archaeological sediments, one could say that
fumiers are among those with a more evident anthropogenic mark.
The preservation of fumiers is guaranteed by a series of factors, such as the high rate of
sedimentation, the thickness of the stratiﬁcation and the geomorphological location of the
sites. Rather paradoxically, it may be stated that the combustion itself is a preservation
factor, as it hinders the decay of part of the mineral fraction included within the organic
remains. Nonetheless, this is really true only in sheltered or dry sites – mostly caves and
rock-shelters – where the ﬁnely grained carbonate ash does not come into contact with
acidic (aggressive) water. At present, and without taking into account lake-shore sites such
as Egolzwil and Arbon Bleiche 3 (Rasmussen 1989, 1993; Akeret et al. 1999), fumier-like
deposits have been observed in only one open-air site – Trasano, in Southern Italy
(G. Radi pers. comm. 2008).

208

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Despite regional variations, the facies recorded in the fumier sequences of caves and rockshelters are almost universal, that is, documented in sites that are hundreds of kilometres
apart and with sedimentary characteristics and features that are almost identical. The fumiers
of El Mirador and Riparo Gaban are made up of the same facies – in both sites the ashed
coprolite-rich, the wood ash, the phytolith-rich and the granular facies are present. The most
striking characteristic is that, in the ﬁeld and under the microscope, the individual facies from
one or the other site are almost indistinguishable. This is not surprising, considering that the
basic sedimentary process is always the same; nonetheless, on a larger scale, each fumier is
diﬀerent, i.e. the stratigraphic or spatial relationships among the facies are not as
standardized as when the characteristics of the sequences are examined closely or on a
microscopic scale. It is worth noting the parallelism with natural sediments, where the
lithofacies indicate the dynamics responsible for the accumulation, while their association is
linked to the depositional environment. In our case, the lithofacies that were identiﬁed in
fumier deposits relate to single human-driven sedimentary dynamics and can be organized
into categories, while the associations of the facies are rather diﬃcult to appreciate, as they
correspond to complex behavioural patterns and cultural practices.
The main diﬀerences between El Mirador and Riparo Gaban are related to the
preservation and continuity of the burnt layers and the extension and distribution of the
homogenized facies: while at El Mirador the layer-cake sequences are fairly continuous, at
Riparo Gaban they are rather restricted and often embedded in homogeneous sediments.
This characteristic was noted also in other Italian sites; the Trieste and Croatian Karst ones
often include homogenized parts, while there is a remarkable continuity at Arene Candide
and in the Abruzzo sites. Another distinction is the presence of the unburned facies; these
seem absent in the Italian sites, e.g. Riparo Gaban, and well-represented in the French and
Iberian sites, e.g. El Mirador. The reason for such a peculiarity is still unclear, as it may
depend on behavioural patterns (diﬀerences in the frequency and duration of occupation of
the sites, the need of cleaning by burning) or on diﬀerential preservation controlled by
regional patterns. By comparing distinct sites, it is clear that fumier facies group in rather
varied ways. Thus the general appearance of the Grotta Sant’Angelo sequence (Boschian
2000; Iaconis and Boschian 2008) closely resembles the ‘pastoral’ cave deposits described
above, with the typical interﬁngering of black and white layers and lenses. It is noteworthy
that mostly very thick white strata (up to 30cm) with few very thin black levels occur within
the middle Neolithic to early Copper Age levels. Conversely, the Late Copper and Bronze
Age levels are made up of rhythmically alternating black and white horizons that are
approximately the same thickness, the white layers being slightly thicker than the black
ones. Brown horizons are also frequently interﬁngered throughout the sequence, often
associated with the bottom of the black ones. The early Neolithic layers, which are ascribed
to the ‘Impressa Ware’ cultural facies, are quite diﬀerent, as they are not organized in blackand-white couples, but are mostly made up of homogeneous brownish sediments. These
embed some evidence of pastoral practices like phytoliths and spherulites, and some larger
coprolite fragments, but are mainly made up of a dominant component originating from
domestic activities (large-size charcoal, bone, pottery, lithics, etc.).
This peculiar contrast between the early Neolithic and the later cultural phases is evident
also at Grotta dei Piccioni (Iaconis and Boschian 2008), where the cultural sequence
resembles closely the Grotta Sant’Angelo one; the same situation probably exists at Arene

Shepherds and karst

209

Candide as well (Courty et al. 1992; Macphail et al. 1997). Conversely, this contrast is not
evident in the Trieste Karst caves (north-east Italy: Boschian 2000; Boschian and
Montagnari-Kokelj 2000), where the sediments including Neolithic cultural remains are
all made up of more or less homogeneously and ﬁnely layered layer-cake sequences.
As to the microscopic characteristics of the association between thin black and thick
white layers in the two sites discussed here, it is noteworthy that the white ones are ﬁnely
laminated, with rhythmic sequences of ash-, phytolith- and phytolith-and-spherulite-rich
horizons. These may result from the occasional burning of layers of wood, litter or fodder,
and dung, each one corresponding to a single phase of stabling within the cave. If it can be
assumed that the thickness of a fumier is indicative of the size of the ﬂocks that were
stabled inside the cave, then these layers may be interpreted as the result of periodical
(seasonal?) visits of small ﬂocks, whose few droppings needed to be burnt only
occasionally, probably once every several visits.
In most Neolithic cave sites, the typical ‘layer-cake’ sequences, where black and white
horizons are comparably thick, are not laminated at the microscopic scale; such sequences
probably result from the cyclical burning, possibly seasonal, of thicker dung accumulations. In this case, the deposits may be preliminarily interpreted as the result of the stabling
of large ﬂocks with seasonal frequency. Nonetheless, other factors may control the
thickness and characteristics of these facies. The removal of dung and its accumulation
into heaps or piles was observed at El Mirador and in some of the Trieste Karst caves, and
can be detected only through large open-area excavations. The ﬁrst experimental results
on the burning of manure undertaken by two of us (MF and JMV; see Vergès 2008) are
showing that the variety and diﬀerentiation of the fumier facies are higher when huge
heaps of manure are burnt, while smaller accumulations originate the classical ‘black-andwhite layer-cake’ sequence. Moreover, the same experiments have also shown, even if
results are still preliminary, that the thickness of the black-and-white couples also depends
on the moisture of the bedrock, on the composition, shape and size of the material used as
fuel, and on the species employed.

Final remarks
In this paper, we have introduced the main characteristics of fumiers. These archaeological
sediments are found all around the Mediterranean region, in sites dating from the early
Neolithic. Given the complexity of fumiers, their study requires an interdisciplinary
approach that involves several archaeological science disciplines. The geoarchaeological
perspective improves the understanding of the composition and of the processes
responsible for the formation of the fumiers, particularly through soil micromorphology.
We have also addressed some methodological aspects related to the ﬁeld excavation of
fumiers and their description, showing how routine sedimentological methods, such as
facies analysis, may apply to these anthropogenic deposits.
The next step in the understanding of fumier deposits is to ﬁnd out if any
correspondence between ﬁeld or microscopic characteristics and human practices can be
found, by contrasting distinct sources of information (micromorphology, archaeobotany,
archaeozoology, experimental archaeology, etc.). Also, the study of cultural remains, in

210

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

terms of typology/use, and quantity versus sediment volume and deposition rate is
expected to provide clues concerning site and landscape use. For the time being, this has
been achieved only in part, while the speciﬁc origin of some peculiarities is still a matter of
research and debate. It can also be pointed out that local environmental or anthropic
conditions, or even chance (does it really exist?), probably played a role that may be
diﬃcult to elucidate at present.
Another aspect where the evidence remains ambiguous is the date of ﬁrst appearance of
fumier sediments in the Neolithic. Archaeological contexts need to be dated more
precisely, and correlated with other aspects of the material culture, in the various areas
under study. New hints on the timing of the appearance of the Neolithic package in
Europe can be expected from continued investigation of these deposits.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their careful comments.
The analysis of Riparo Gaban was undertaken in the context of the project APSAT
(‘Environment and landscapes of Trento district’s upland-sites’), funded by the Provincia
Autonoma di Trento (Italy).
Diego E. Angelucci, Department of Philosophy, History and
Cultural Heritage, University of Trento
diego.angelucci@lett.unitn.it
Giovanni Boschian, University of Pisa
Marta Fontanals, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona
Annaluisa Pedrotti, University of Trento
Josep Maria Vergès, Institut Català de Paleoecologia
Humana i Evolució Social / Universitat Rovira i Virgili
References
Akeret, Ö., Haas, J. N., Leuzinger, U. and Jacomet, S. 1999. Plant macrofossils and pollen in goat/
sheep faeces from the Neolithic lake-shore settlement Arbon Bleiche 3, Switzerland. The Holocene,
9(2): 175–82.
Alday Ruiz, A., Fernández Eraso, J. and Yusta, I. 2003. Suelos de habitación: suelos de corrales: los
casos de Atxoste y los Husos. Veleia, 20: 183–225.
Argant, J., Heinz, C. and Brochier, J. L. 1991. Pollens, charbons de bois et sediments: l’action
humaine et la végétation, cas de la grotte d’Antonnaire (Montmaur-en-Diois, Drôme). Re´vue
d’Arche´ome´trie, 15: 29–40.
Arsuaga, J. L., Bermúdez de Castro, J. M. and Carbonell, E. (eds) 1997. The Sima de los Huesos
hominid site. Journal of Human Evolution, 33: 105–421.
Badal, E. 1999. El potencial pecuario de la vegetación mediterránea: las cuevas Redil. In Actes del II
Congre´s del Neolı´tic a la Penı´nsula Ibe`rica. València: Universitat de València, pp. 69–76.
Bagolini, B. 1980. Riparo Gaban: Preistoria ed Evoluzione dell’Ambiente. Trento: Museo Tridentino
di Scienze Naturali.

Shepherds and karst

211

Bagolini, B. and Pedrotti, A. 1996. Il Riparo Gaban (loc. Piazzina di Martignano – Trento). In
Paleolitico, Mesolitico e Neolitico dell’Italia nord-orientale (ed. A. Broglio). Guide archeologiche,
Preistoria e Protostoria in Italia, vol. 4. Forlı̀: ABACO, pp. 118–29.
Balista, C. 1977. Studio sedimentologico preliminare della successione stratigraﬁca del Riparo
Gaban (Trento). Preistoria Alpina, 13: 31–45.
Barker, P. 1977. Techniques of Archaeological Excavations. London: Batsford.
Bergadà, M. M. 1997. Actividad antrópica registrada en algunas secuencias arqueológicas en cueva del
Neolı́tico antiguo catalán a través del análisis micromorfológico. Trabajos de Prehistoria, 54(2): 151–62.
Bergadà, M. M., Cebrià, A. and Mestres, J. 2005. Practicas de estabulación durante el
Neolı́tico Antiguo en Cataluña a traves de la micromorfologı́a: cueva de la Guineu (FontRubı́, Alt Penedès, Barcelona). In Actas del III Congreso del Neolı´tico de la Penı´nsula Ibe´rica
(eds P. Arias, R. Ontañón and C. Garcı́a-Moncó). Santander: Universidad de Cantabria, pp. 187–96.
Bermúdez de Castro, J. M., Carbonell, E. and Arsuaga, J. L. (eds) 1999. The Gran Dolina site: TD6
Aurora Stratum (Atapuerca, Burgos, Spain). Journal of Human Evolution, 37: 309–700.
Blasco, A., Edo, M., Villalba, M. J. and Buxó, R. 1999. Del cardial al postcardial en la cueva de Can Sadurnı́
(Begues, Barcelona): primeros datos sobre su secuencia estratigráﬁca, paleoeconómica y ambiental. In
Actas del II Congre´s del Neolı´tic a la Penı´nsula Ibe`rica. València: Universitat de València, pp. 59–67.
Boschian, G. 2000. New data on the pastoral use of caves in Italy. In Volume in Memoria di A. M.
Radmilli (ed. P. Biagi). Trieste: Società Preistoria Protostoria Friuli-Venezia Giulia, 8, pp. 63–72.
Boschian, G. 2006. Geoarchaeology of Pupićina cave. In Prehistoric Herders in Istria (Croatia): The
Archaeology of Pupic´ina Cave, Vol. 1 (eds P. T. Miracle and S. Forenbaher). Pula: Archaeological
Museum of Istria.
Boschian, G. and Miracle, P. T. 2008. Shepherds and caves in the Karst of Istria (Croatia). In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Soils and Archaeology (ed. G. Boschian). Atti
Società toscana Scienze naturali, Mem., Serie A, 112(2007), pp. 173–80.
Boschian, G. and Montagnari-Kokelj, E. 2000. Prehistoric shepherds and caves in the Trieste Karst
(Northeastern Italy). Geoarchaeology, 15(4): 331–71.
Brewer, R. 1976. Fabric and Mineral Analysis of Soils. New York: Robert E. Krieger.
Brochier, J.-E. 1983. Bergeries et feux de bois néolithiques dans le Midi de la France: caractérisation
et incidence sur le raisonnement sédimentologique. Quartär, 33–4: 119–35.
Brochier, J.-E. 1988. Sedimentologie, environnement et activites humaines du Néolithique aux temps
historiques: les sediments anthropiques de l’abri de Fontjuvenal. In Six mille´naires d’historie de
l’environnement: e´tude interdisciplinaire de l’abri sous roche de Font-Juve´nal (Conques sur L’Aude)
Toulouse: Centre d’anthropologie des sociétés rurales, pp. 20–30.
Brochier, J.-E. 1991. Géoarchéologie du monde agropastoral. In Pour une arche´ologie agraire (ed.
J. Guilaine). Paris: A. Colin, pp. 303–22.
Brochier, J.-E. 1995. Estudi geoarqueològic dels dipòsits holocens de la Balma de la Margineda:
capes 1 a 6. In Les excavacions a la Balma de la Margineda (1979–1991) (eds J. Guilaine and
M. Martzluf). Andorra: Edicions del Govern d’Andorra, pp. 56–90.
Brochier, J. E. 2002. Les sédiments anthropiques: méthodes d’étude et perspectives. In Ge´ologie de
la Pre´histoire: me´thodes, techniques, applications, 2nd edn (ed. J.-C. Miskovswi). Paris: Geopré,
pp. 453–77.
Brochier, J. E. and Claustre, F. 1994. Le parcage des bovins et le problème des litières du Néolithique
ﬁnal à l’Âge du Bronze dans la Grotte de Bélesta. In XXIVe Congre`s Pre´historique de France:
Habitats, e´conomies et socie´te´s du Nord-Ouest me´diterranne´en (Carcassonne, 26–30 Septembre 1994),
pp. 27–36.

212

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Brochier, J.-E., Villa, P. and Giacomarra, M. 1992. Shepherds and sediments: geo-ethnoarchaeology
of pastoral sites. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, 11: 47–102.
Brochier, J. E., Claustre, F. and Heinz, C. 1998. Environmental impact of Neolithic and Bronze
Age farming in the eastern Pyrenees forelands, based on multidisciplinary investigations at La Caune
de Bélesta (Bélesta Cave), near Perpignan, France. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany, 7: 1–9.
Bullock, P. N., Fedoroﬀ, N., Jongerius, G. J., Stoops, G., Tursina, T. and Babel, U. (eds) 1985.
Handbook for Soil Thin Section Description. Wolverhampton: Waine Research.
Cabanes, D., Burjachs, F., Expósito, I., Rodrı́guez, A., Allué, E., Euba, I. and Vergès, J. M. 2007.
Formation processes through archaeobotanical remains: the case of the Bronze Age levels in El
Mirador cave, Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain. Quaternary International, 193(1–2): 160–73.
Cabanilles, J. J., Martı́nez Valle, R., Badal Garcı́a, E., Orozco Kholër, T. and Verdasco Cebrián, C.
2005. Un aprisco bajo abrigo en el yacimiento eneolı́tico de ‘El Cinto Mariano’ (Requena, Valencia).
In Actas del III Congreso del Neolı´tico en la Penı´nsula Ibe´rica (eds P. Arias, R. Ontañón and C.
Garcı́a Moncó). Santander: Universidad de Cantabria, pp. 167–74.
Cáceres, I., Lozano, M. and Saladié, P. 2007. Evidence for Bronze Age cannibalism in El Mirador cave
(Sierra de Atapuerca, Burgos, Spain). American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 133: 899–917.
Carbonell, E., Bermúdez de Castro, J. M., Parés, J. M., Pérez-González, A., Cuenca-Bescós, G.,
Ollé, A., Mosquera, M., Huguet, R., van der Made, J., Rosas, A., Sala, R., Vallverdú, J., Garcı́a, N.,
Granger, D. E., Martinón-Torres, M., Rodrı́guez, X. P., Stock, G. M., Vergès, J. M., Allué, E.,
Burjachs, F., Cáceres, I., Canals, A., Benito, A., Dı́ez, C., Lozano, M., Mateos, A., Navazo, M.,
Rodrı́guez, J., Rosell, J. and Arsuaga, J. L. 2008. The ﬁrst hominin of Europe. Nature, 452: 465–9.
Carrancho, Á., Villalaı́n, J. J., Vallverdú, J., Angelucci, D. E. and Vergès, J. M. 2006. Estudio de las
propiedades magnéticas de estructuras de combustión arqueológicas: la Cueva del Mirador (Sierra
de Atapuerca, Burgos). Actas de la Va Asamblea Hispano-Portuguesa de Geodesia y Geofı´sica
(Sevilla, Spain). CD-rom edition.
Courty, M.-A. and Wattez, J. 1987. Morphology of ash of some plant materials. In Soil
Micromorphology (eds N. Fedoroﬀ, L. M. Bresson and M. A. Courty). Paris: Association Française
pour l’Étude du Sol, pp. 677–83.
Courty, M.-A., Goldberg, P. and Macphail, R. I. 1989. Soils and Micromorphology in Archaeology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Courty, M.-A., Macphail, R. and Wattez, J. 1992. Soil micromorphological indicators of pastoralism:
with special reference to Arene Candide, Finale Ligure, Italy. In Archeologia della Pastorizia
nell’Europa Meridionale (eds R. Maggi, R. Nisbet and G. Barker). Rivista di Studi Liguri, 2(57): 127–50.
Delhon, C., Martin, L., Argant, J. and Thiébault, S. 2008. Shepherds and plants in the Alps: multiproxy archaeobotanical analysis of neolithic dung from ‘La Grande Rivoire’ (Isère, France). Journal
of Archaeological Science, 35: 2937–52.
Fernández, J. 2008. Establos de cronologı́a neolı́tica en la Rioja alavesa. In Actas del IV Congreso del
Neolı´tico Peninsular (eds M. S. Hernández, J. A. Soler and J.A. López). Alicante: MARQ (Museo
Arqueológico de Alicante) and Diputación de Alicante, pp. 361–7.
Forenbaher, S. and Vranjican Pandžić, P. 1985. Vaganacka pećina. Opvscvla Archaeologica, Papers
of the Department of Archaeology, University of Zagreb, 10(1): 1–21.
Garcı́a Puchol, O. and Aura Tortosa, J. E. (eds) 2006. El abric de La Falguera (Alcoi, Alacant): 8000
años de ocupación humana en la cabecera del rı´o de Alcoi. Alicante: Diputación de Alicante,
Ayuntamiento de Alcoy y Caja de Ahorros del Mediterráneo.
Goldberg, P. and Macphail, R. I. 2006. Practical and Theoretical Geoarchaeology. Oxford: Blackwell
Science.
Harris, E. C. 1979. Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy. London: Academic Press.

Shepherds and karst

213

Helmer, D. 1984. Le parcage des moutons et des chèvres au Néolithique ancien et moyen dans le
sud de France. In Animals and Archaeology, Vol. 3, Early Herders and their Flocks (eds J.
Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson). Oxford: British Archaeological Reports International Series 202,
pp. 39–45.
Iaconis, M. A. and Boschian, G. 2008. Geoarchaeology of the deposits of Grotta dei Piccioni and
Grotta Sant’Angelo (Abruzzo, Central Italy). In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Soils and Archaeology (ed. G. Boschian). Atti Società toscana Scienze naturali, Mem., Serie A,
112(2007): 181–8.
Kozlowski, S. K. and Dalmeri, G. 2002. Riparo Gaban: the Mesolithic layers. Preistoria Alpina, 36:
3–42.
Macphail, R., Courty, M.-A., Hather, J., Wattez, J., Ryder, M., Cameron, N. and Branch, N. P.
1997. The soil micromorphological evidence of domestic occupation and stabling activities. In Arene
Candide: A Functional and Environmental Assessment of the Holocene Sequence (Excavations
Bernabò Brea-Cardini 1940–50) (eds R. Maggi, E. Starnini and B. Voytek). Memorie Istituto Italiano
Paleontologia Umana, 5: 53–88.
Moore, R. C. 1949. Meaning of facies. In Sedimentary Facies in Geological History (ed. C. R.
Longwell). Geological Society America Memoir, 39: 1–34.
Oms, X., Bargalló, A., Chaler, M., Fontanals, M., Garcı́a, M. S., López, J. M., Morales, J. I.,
Nievas, T., Rodrı́guez, A., Serra, J., Solé, A. and Vergès, J. M. 2008. La cova Colomera (Sant Esteve
de la Sarga, Lleida), una cueva-redil en el Prepirineo de Lérida: primeros resultados y perspectivas de
futuro. In Actas del IV Congreso del Neolı´tico Peninsular (eds M. S. Hernández, J. A. Soler and J. A.
López). Alicante: MARQ (Museo Arqueológico de Alicante) and Diputación de Alicante, pp. 230–6.
Polo Dı́az, A. and Fernández Eraso, J. 2007. Aportación de la micromorfologı́a a la determinación
de los rediles prehistóricos en el Alto Valle del Ebro: el caso del Neolı́tico de Los Husos II (El Villar,
Álava). In Contribuciones al Estudio del Periodo Cuaternario (eds J. Lario and P. G. Silva). Ávila:
AEQUA, pp. 119–20.
Rasmussen, P. 1989. Leaf-foddering of livestock in the Neolithic: archaeobotanical evidence from
Weir, Switzerland. Journal of Danish Archaeology, 8: 51–71.
Rasmussen, P. 1993. Analysis of goat/sheep faeces from Egolzwil 3, Switzerland: evidence for branch
and twig foddering of livestock in the Neolithic. Journal of Archaeological Science, 20: 479–502.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O. and Weiner, S. 1996. Ash deposits in Hayonim and Kebara
Caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological
implications. Journal of Archaeological Science, 23: 763–81.
Schuldenrein J. 2001. Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and site formation at Konispol Cave, Southwest
Albania. Geoarchaeology, 16(5): 559–602.
Shahack-Gross, R., Albert, R. M., Gilboa, A., Nagar-Hilman, O., Sharon, I. and Weiner, S. 2005.
Geoarchaeology in an urban context: the uses of space in a Phoenician monumental building at Tel
Dor (Israel). Journal of Archaeological Science, 32: 1417–31.
Sordoillet, D., Chiquet, P., Piguet-Wernli, M., Treﬀort, J.-M. and Voruz, J.-L. 2008. Anthropic
sediments from Neolithic to Iron Age settlements: interpretation according to micromorphological,
archaeozoological and archaeological data. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Soils and Archaeology (ed. G. Boschian). Atti Società toscana Scienze naturali, Mem., Serie A,
112(2007): 165–71.
Stoops, G. 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith Thin Sections. Madison,
WI: Soil Science Society of America.
Verdasco C. 2001. Depósitos naturales de cueva alterados: estudio microsedimentológico de
acumulaciones producidas en el neolı́tico valenciano por la estabulación de ovicápridos. Cuaternario
& Geomorfologı´a, 15(3–4): 85–94.

214

Diego E. Angelucci et al.

Vergès, J. M. 2008. La combustión del estiercol: aproximación experimental a la quema en montón
de los depósitos de redil. In II Congreso Internacional de Arqueologı´a Experimental: Abstracts (eds A.
Morgado, J. Baena and D. Garcı́a), 26–8 November, Ronda, pp. 73–5.
Vergès, J. M., Allué, E., Angelucci, D. E., Cebrià, A., Dı́ez. C., Fontanals, M., Manyanós, A.,
Montero, S., Moral, S., Vaquero, M. and Zaragoza, J. 2002. La Sierra de Atapuerca durante el
Holoceno: datos preliminares sobre las ocupaciones de la Edad del Bronce en la Cueva de El
Mirador (Ibeas de Juarros, Burgos). Trabajos de Prehistoria, 59(1): 107–26.
Vergès, J. M., Allué, E., Angelucci, D. E., Burjachs, F., Carrancho, A., Cebrià, A., Expósito, I.,
Fontanals, M., Moral, S., Rodrı́guez, A. and Vaquero, M. 2008. Los niveles neolı́ticos de la cueva de
El Mirador (Sierra de Atapuerca, Burgos): nuevos datos sobre la implantación y el desarrollo de la
economı́a agropecuaria en la submeseta norte. In Actas del IV Congreso del Neolı´tico Peninsular (eds
M. S. Hernández, J. A. Soler and J. A. López). Alicante: MARQ (Museo Arqueológico de Alicante)
and Diputación de Alicante, pp. 418–27.
Zazo, C., Goy, J. L. and Hoyos, M. 1983. Estudio geomorfológico de los alrededores de la Sierra de
Atapuerca. Estudios Geológicos, 39: 179–85.

Diego E. Angelucci, geoarchaeologist, is Associate Professor of Methodology of
Archaeological Research at the University of Trento (Italy). He has mostly developed
his research in Italy, Spain and Portugal, analysing the archaeology, formation processes
and environmental context of prehistoric and historical archaeological sites.
Giovanni Boschian, anthropologist and geoarchaeologist, is a researcher at the Department
of Archaeological Science of the University of Pisa (Italy). His main interests are human
ecology of the Pleistocene hunter-gatherers and of the early Holocene farmers, cave site
sedimentology/micromorphology and formation processes.
Marta Fontanals is developing her work in experimental archaeology at URV (Universitat
Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain). Her research is focused on the Pleistocene–Holocene
transition, and she is currently coordinating ﬁeldwork at several Mesolithic and Neolithic
sites located in the Mediterranean area of the Iberian Peninsula.
Annaluisa Pedrotti is Associate Professor of Prehistory and Protohistory at the University of
Trento (Italy). Her main activities deal with the Neolithic and Copper Age in the Alpine region
and Northern Italy, with particular interest in the study of the cultural framework, the
settlement system, the funerary practices and raw material procurement. She is a member of the
Commission 14 ‘Civilisations néolithiques de la Méditerranée et de l’Europe’ of UISSP. In
2001 and 2004–7 she was coordinator of the Culture 2000 EU project ‘Alps before frontiers’.
Josep Maria Vergès is researcher at IPHES (Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i
Evolució Social) and associate professor at URV. His research work is mainly centred on the
characterization of the processes involved in the deformation of lithic surfaces. Since 1999 he
has been coordinating the excavation at El Mirador.

