Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

From Evenk campﬁres to prehistoric hearths: charcoal analysis as a
tool for identifying the use of rotten wood as fuel
ade Henry*, Isabelle The
ry-Parisot 1
Aure
CNRS UMR 7264 CEPAM, Campus St-Jean d'Ang
ely SJA3, 24 Av. Des Diables Bleus, 06375 Nice Cedex 04, France

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 4 February 2014
Received in revised form
1 September 2014
Accepted 4 September 2014
Available online 18 September 2014

We present a new approach combining ethnoarchaeology and experimentation aiming towards a better
understanding of prehistoric ﬁrewood use and management. The example of present fuel management
practices among a residentially mobile group of Evenk Siberian reindeer herders, shows how ethnoarchaeology can provide an analytical background for the study of complex maneenvironment interrelations. Ethnographic observation conﬁrmed in particular that the moisture content and structural
soundness of the wood can be linked to hearth function: rotten conifers for instance, are used for hide
smoking by several groups living in the boreal forests of the Northern hemisphere. Charcoal samples
from an Evenk hearth fed with rotten Larix cajanderi (Siberian larch) showed a high proportion of
microscopic features diagnostic of fungal alterations.
A series of systematic experimental combustions on Pinus sylvestris (scots Pine) conﬁrmed the existence of a relationship between the frequency and the intensity of fungal alterations visible after the
combustion and the initial state of the wood used in the hearth. The establishment of an alteration index
allows now to take a new parameter, the structural soundness of the wood, into account when performing archaeological charcoal analyses.
© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Charcoal analysis
Hearth
Experimentation
Ethnoarchaeology
Prehistory
Fuel management

1. Introduction
Over the past years, charcoal analysis or anthracology has been
used in combination with complementary approaches combining
palaeoenvironmental and socio-economical studies that seek to
discuss ﬁrewood management (i.e., the process of exploitation and
use of ligneous fuel resources in a given environment) among
ry-Parisot, 2001; Asouti and Austin, 2005).
prehistoric societies (The
In this regard, ethnobotany has emerged as a methodological
approach (Chabal, 1994; Ntinou et al., 1999; Ntinou, 2002;
Moutarde, 2007). Ethnoarchaeology beneﬁts charcoal studies by
revealing the complexity and the variety of ﬁrewood management
practices, which are deeply embedded within the cultural and
ecological context they originate from Henry et al., (2009). The
analysis of this variability of practices reveals general patterns that
can help fuel management theory building. For instance, ethnographic work carried out under very different latitudes reminds us

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ33 695 952 511.
E-mail address: aureade.henry@me.com (A. Henry).
1
Tel.: þ33 489 88 15 43.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2014.09.005
0305-4403/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

that the criteria according to which a society chooses its ﬁrewood
cannot be reduced to a “simple” taxonomic selection: other characteristics, such as the calibre or the state of the wood (i.e., green,
ryseasoned, rotten), are at least as important as the species (The
~ a et al., 2003; Alix and Brewster, 2004;
Parisot, 2001; Zapata Pen
Dufraisse et al., 2007; Henry et al., 2009; Joly et al., 2009;
Picornell et al., 2011).
The behaviour of wood during combustion is measured in terms
of heat efﬁciency (e.g. ﬂame height, ember production, combustion
speed, ignition qualities) and caloriﬁc value (total quantity of energy released by weight unit of fuel). As they are deﬁned by the
chemical and physical characteristics of wood, these properties are
species-dependent; however, they are signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by the
calibre and the state of the wood (moisture content, structural
soundness) employed, which have a greater inﬂuence on the
ry-Parisot, 1998,
combustion process than the species itself (The
2001).
One of the goals of experimenting in anthracology is precisely to
identify these parameters in order to characterize the combustion
more accurately and, therefore, to clarify the criteria for past ﬁrery-Parisot, 2001; Ludemann and Nelle,
wood selection and use (The
ry-Parisot and Henry, 2012).
2002; Moskal-del Hoyo et al., 2010; The

322

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Generally, the methodology employed is the standardized production under controlled conditions of charcoal reference sets, on
which morphometric analyses are performed in order to verify the
existence of given causal relationships between the characteristics
of the wood ante combustion (moisture content, structural
soundness) and the presence post combustion of certain speciﬁc
characteristics e.g., radial cracks, cell wall deformations, collapsed
ry-Parisot, 2001; Badal and Carrio
 n, 2004;
cells, fungal hyphae (The
 et al., 2009; The
ry-Parisot and Henry, 2012).
Allue
A few experimental studies dealing with fuel use have also
included ethnographic reference sets consisting mainly of samples
from hearths and/or fuels (Mallol et al., 2007; Tsartsidou et al.,
2008; Lancelotti and Madella, 2012; Gur-Arieh et al., 2013), but
they remain rare in the ﬁeld of charcoal analysis (Ntinou, 2002;
Henry, 2011).
Through an approach combining ethnoarchaeology and
experimentation, this paper focuses on the selection of rotten
conifers for the ﬁre. First, we analyse the place of this practice in
the ﬁrewood management system of nomad Evenks living today in
the boreal forests of south-eastern Siberia. Then, we present the
results of the charcoal study of two Evenk hearths, which showed
signiﬁcant differences in the frequency and the intensity of
microscopic wood decay features attributable to fungi. Supplementary laboratory experiments involved the analysis of 1250
charcoal fragments from 10 batches of Pinus sylvestris in different
states in order to verify that the soundness of the wood can be
inferred through charcoal analysis. Our results lead us to propose a
method based on the micromorphological characteristics of wood
decay for assessing the soundness of the wood ante combustion
(healthy vs. dead vs. rotten) and its implications for prehistoric
charcoal analysis.

2. Firewood management practices among Evenki of Amur
Region
2.1. Context of the study
One of the aims of the ethnoarchaeological ﬁeldwork (project
me Renne”) was to obtain ﬁrst-hand information from
“Syste
human groups living under cold environmental conditions
similar to those prevailing in Europe during the Upper Palaeolithic and/or the Early Mesolithic, in order to evaluate the
impact of mobility and strong seasonal constraints on fuel
management.
Nearly three months were spent in the North-eastern part of the
Amur Region (Eastern Siberia, Russian Federation), with Oro
conEvenks associated with the village of Ivanovskoe (Evenk name
Ulgen). Most of the time was spent in the taiga, on the territory of a
group of reindeer herders, in the valley of the Kharga River and its
slopes (Fig. 1). This area, at an altitude of 700e900 m a.s.l., is
covered by boreal forest in which larch (Larix cajanderi Mayr.) is the
dominant species.
In order to observe as many ﬁre-related activities as possible,
two ﬁeldtrips were taken at different times of the year (late winter/
beginning of spring 2006 and end of summer/beginning of autumn
2007). Direct ﬁeld observations were complemented by a series of
oral history interviews about traditional activities, beliefs and wood
uses (Henry et al., 2009; Henry, 2011).
2.2. Firewood management: main results
Four main vegetation types were present within 2 km around
the Evenk campsites we visited: riverine vegetation (Evenk:

Fig. 1. Location of the ethnoarchaeological survey.

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

hulgakata), Dwarf pine (Pinus pumila) shrubland (bolgi), open larch
(L. cajanderi) woodland (light-needled taiga, bori) and mixed spruce
(Picea obovata) forest (dark-needled taiga, ahign).
According to our informants, 20 trees and shrubs are
commonly used for woodworking, subsistence and medicine, but
only three are employed as fuel. During our stays, even though the
four vegetation types were frequented on a daily basis, only the
light-needled taiga and more speciﬁcally, its main species, L.
cajanderi (irjakt
e), was harvested for fuel. In addition, a clear
disinterest in shrubby taxa and the avoidance of white birch
(Betula pendula), believed to be harmful to humans and animals,
was also noted.
The preference for Larix spp. (larch) is so strong that it inﬂuences
settlement patterns i.e., the Evenks cite the direct availability of
standing dead larch as one of the four fundamental criteria when
choosing a campsite (Henry et al., 2009; Lavrillier, 2007).
Seasonal parameters also inﬂuence decisively ﬁrewood management in terms of fuel needs, which vary according to meteorological conditions but also to seasonal activities. Seasonality,
mainly in terms of presence/absence of snow, also impacts the
wood acquisition distances and means, the number and type of
hearths and their function (Fig. 2). The quite simple organization

323

observed at the winter camp (one indoor stove (ohok), fed mainly
by standing dry but also green larch) changes in favour of a more
complex pattern when the snow cover melts: fallen wood (gara)
becomes available and can be used in the different outdoor
campﬁres (atu) that are used throughout the snowless seasons,
mainly for cooking, curing meat and smudging. Two types of features are directly linked to the cultural and economical context, i.e.
smudging and smoking ﬁres.
2.3. Smudge and smoke ﬁres
Smudge ﬁres (samnin) are inseparable from domestic reindeer.
They burn constantly from late spring until early autumn to protect
the herd from ﬂying insects (Ingold, 1980; Lavrillier, 2007;
Brandisauskas, 2007; Anikhovskij et al., 2012). The samnin are
mostly fed with green wood, but other smoke-producing fuels such as
fresh boughs, moist dead branches or mosses can also be used. Since
the sole purpose of the ﬁre is to produce smoke, the moisture and/or
water content of the fuel are far more important than the species.
In the case of hide-smoking hearths, taxon and state of the wood
are equally important: the fuel used is dark red, rotten and crumbling larch (Larix spp.), hilt
e (Henry et al., 2009; Lavrillier, 2005;

Fig. 2. Seasonality and activities linked to ﬁre.

Discrete notches of cell-wall erosion
At an advanced stage of decay,
numerous cavities coalesce together

Cavities with conically shaped ends in secondary walls
Gradual breakdown of the wood cell
Progressive erosion of
wall layer of the secondary wall
secondary walls but middle
lamella not degraded

Macroscopic
aspect of
wood
Microscopic
characteristics

Cell walls collapse and appear
distorted

Diffusion of degradative
substances by hyphae
Extensive breakdown
of cellulose and hemicellulose;
some lignin modiﬁcation
Cubic fractures, shiny and brittle
appearance, crumbling texture,
colour reddish (cellulose degraded)
Loss of birefringence
Leaves a network of residual
lignin (i.e., earlywood is affected
before latewood)
Fungal
action

Separation of individual
Cell wall becomes thinner,
cells from one another
degraded from the lumen
outwards
Deligniﬁcation of the middle lamella or dissolution of lignin
out of cell wall by hyphae
Localized erosion of secondary wall layers and middle
lamella
Attack of all cell wall components lead to voids within the
degraded wood

Spongy texture of wood surface

Degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose through hyphae; some
lignin modiﬁcation

Type I

Degrade lignin, celluloses and hemicelluloses (fungal species and
wood composition-dependent)
Degradation in the immediate
Degradation of
vicinity of hyphae
hemicellulose and lignin
by hyphae
Fibrous, colour whitish (lignin degraded ﬁrst)

Soft rot

Selective deligniﬁcation:
rare in gymnosperms
Simultaneous rot

Fungi expand inside the ligneous structure by producing spores,
which develop into hyphae, altering the structure of carbohydrates
(cellulose and hemicellulose) and/or lignin by depolymerization
(Blanchette, 2000). According to their mode of degradation of the
wood cell walls, fungal decay types are categorized into brown rot,
white rot and soft rot (Table 1). However, a range of studies show
that the identiﬁcation of decay types on the grounds of micromorphological characteristics alone is open to question (Schwarze,
2007). The degradation of wood components lead to strength,
weight and density losses whose progressive stages are microscopically identiﬁable through different types of cell wall alterations, i.e. cavities in secondary walls, cellular degradations or voids
(Blanchette, 2000; Irbe et al., 2006; Schweingruber et al., 2006).
Eventually, the decay of the cell wall components leads to the
collapse of the initial cellular arrangement (Blanchette et al., 1997;
Hakala et al., 2004; Levin et al., 2007).
Previous experimental studies show that fungal decay features,
but also hyphae, are still visible after the combustion on charred
wood samples inoculated with brown and soft rot under laboratory
ry-Parisot, 1998, 2001) but also on decayed wood
conditions (The
collected in natural environments (Moskal-del Hoyo et al., 2010;
Henry, 2011). The action of wood degradation agents has also
been identiﬁed on archaeological charcoal from several European
ry-Parisot,
sites dating from the Middle Palaeolithic onwards (The

White rot

3.1. Previous research

Brown rot: commonest in
gymnosperms

3. The preservation of wood decay features on charcoal

Agent

Brandisauskas, 2010; Anikhovskij et al., 2012). Burning coals are
added to ignite a ﬁrst layer of hilt
e, which is then completely
covered by a second layer, creating a low-oxygen, slow, smoky and
smouldering combustion which leads to the formation and the
adhesion of a thin browneyellow layer (njuksa) on the hides' surface that waterproofs the hide and improves its resistance. The
hide-smoking hearth we observed had been in use for the last four
autumns, for a total duration of 6e8 h of combustion.
The information gathered among Evenks from Ulgen conﬁrms
that the notion of “good fuel” is relative and depends on several
criteria such as resource availability, people's preferences and the
ﬁnal purpose of the wood (hearth type and function). Accordingly,
the Evenks use one main tree species, L. cajanderi (larch), under
different states: green or seasoned, healthy or degraded in order to
respond to different hearth functions (Brandisauskas, 2007;
Lavrillier, 2005 and pers. comm., 2007; Henry et al., 2009).
It is also worth noting that seasonality and mobility are deeply
intertwined within the ﬁrewood management system. For
example, hearth functions, by relating directly to the cultural and
socio-economic context, also convey information about the season
and therefore, the function of the occupation site. None of this information is accessible to the charcoal analyst through the ﬂoristic
identiﬁcation of the hearth remains, since L. cajanderi was the only
species used in the Evenk camps we visited. On the other hand, a
very specialized ﬁre-related activity such as hide-smoking illustrates how the identiﬁcation of the state of the wood may be crucial
for the understanding of hearth function and its societal implications. According to previous work, the recognition of fungal decay
features preserved on charcoal may allow diagnosing the use of
ry-Parisot, 2001; Badal and Carrio
n,
degraded wood as a fuel (The
ry-Parisot and Texier, 2006; Moskal-del Hoyo et al.,
2004; The
2010).
In order to test this hypothesis, bulk samples were taken from
the hide-smoking hearth and from one smudge campﬁre; these
correspond to the features the herders gave us permission to
sample.

Type II

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Table 1
Main characteristics of wood degradation by fungi, after Schwarze (2007); Blanchette (2000); Volk (2000); Lee et al. (2004).

324

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

n, 2004; The
ry-Parisot and Texier,
1998, 2001; Badal and Carrio
2006; Marguerie and Hunot, 2007; Moskal-del Hoyo et al., 2010;
Henry, 2011; Fig. 3). But it still remains difﬁcult to interpret, as
charring induces the disappearance and/or the modiﬁcation of
anatomical and biochemical characteristics, as well as the fragmentation of the material (Zicherman and Williamson, 1981; Prior
and Gasson, 1993; Braadbaart and Poole, 2008). In other words, not
all of the microscopic criteria deﬁned for unburned wood are
applicable to the study of charcoals; this is particularly true in the
case of birefringence and thickness of the cell walls, which are
signiﬁcantly altered by the combustion. On the other hand,
advanced decay features such as deformation, collapsed cell walls
and gaps in wood structure are preserved after charring, and

325

ryindicate that combustion of altered dead wood occurred (The
Parisot, 1998, 2001).
However, the available literature does not specify any quantiﬁcation method that deﬁnes the minimal frequency of altered
charcoals that would allow us to interpret a charcoal assemblage as
the end-product of the combustion of dead, altered wood.
The meaning, in terms of assemblage interpretation, of these
alterations can therefore be questioned.
Consequently, the aim of this study is to test the correlation
between microscopic alteration features and the macroscopic state
of the wood. In this context, the analysis of charred present-day
material whose initial state is known is an indispensable aid for
archaeological interpretation.

Fig. 3. Pinus sylvestris (Scots Pine) charcoal from the Mesolithic site Clos de Poujol (Aveyron, France), showing micromorphological characteristics of fungal decay ante combustion.

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

326

3.2. Charcoal analysis of two Evenk hearths
3.2.1. First observations and proposal of a methodology
Several charcoals from the samnin (Sample S) and the hidesmoking hearth (Sample N) were randomly selected and examined for decay features. Fresh manual cuts of the three sections of
wood (transversal, radial and tangential) were observed with a 100,
200 and 500 magniﬁcation under a reﬂected light microscope
using dark- and brightﬁeld illumination. As expected, micromorphological decay features attributable to fungi were preserved,
namely hyphae, perforated cell walls, cellular deformations of
variable intensity and/or voids in the wood structure. They were
most visible and clearly identiﬁable on the transverse section (TS),
which led us to discard the longitudinal sections and develop a
methodology based on the study of fungal alteration of the TS.
Maybe less expected was the fact that both hearths contained
unaltered as well as altered charcoal fragments, the latter showing
low to high and localized to generalized fungal alteration features.
This variability appeared sometimes within a single charcoal fragment, and depended on the dimensions of the observation area and
on the location of the cut.
In other terms, the study of one charcoal fragment, even if it
shows advanced signs of decay by fungi, cannot deﬁne the
macroscopic state of the branch or the wood assemblage it comes
from. This observation points to the need for a quantitative
approach in order to test if the study of a minimal number of
charcoal TS would allow discrimination of samples S and N.
On the other hand, the intensity of fungal decay features does
reﬂect the duration of the colonization of the wood by fungi (from
the appearance of cavities and small voids, to cellular dissociation,
deformation and collapse) and therefore, refers concretely to the
decay of healthy wood into altered wood.
This suggests that it is important to associate ﬁner qualitative
attributes with the global distinction between unaltered and
altered fragments. Therefore, and coherently with section 2 and our
own microscopic observations of the decay features on charcoal, we
propose a classiﬁcation into four progressive intensities of alteration, referred to from now on as “Alteration Levels” (A.L., see
Table 3): zero (0) low (1), medium (2) and high (3). A.L. 0 and 1
concern the incipient stages of colonization of wood by fungi,
respectively no/very localized cell wall perforations (Figs. 4 and 5),
A.L. 2 and 3 refer to the more global and structural cellular changes
that intervene afterwards, such as the modiﬁcation of the cell
shape, cellular voids and deformations (Figs. 6 and 7), with the
main difference between A.L. 2 and 3 being that decay is spatially
restricted to certain areas and/or cellular deformations are less
extensive for A.L. 2.
We studied the transverse sections of 150 charcoals from each
Evenk hearth, picked randomly from among the 2e4 mm fraction

(a size class commonly represented among archaeological charcoals). In order to verify that the minimal number of fragments to
be analysed had been reached, we used a graphic display common
in the ﬁeld of anthracology, the saturation curve, a regression curve
showing the ﬂoristic evolution according to the number of analysed
fragments (Chabal, 1997; Chabal et al., 1999). Their general shape
allows determining the heterogeneity of the sample, and their
stabilization indicates that the optimal number of charcoal fragments to be taken into account for obtaining a representative
sample is reached. Our version of these curves takes into account
the percentages of the different A.L. per number of identiﬁed
fragments.
3.2.2. Results: ethnographic material
The analysis of 150 charcoals for each ﬁre shows that the total
percentage of altered charcoals, as well as the proportions between
the different A.L., are stable at around 100, but that the main tendencies are already perceptible after the study of 50 charcoals
(Fig. 8a). These trends differ signiﬁcantly between the two samples:
sample S contained 34% of altered charcoal, of which the highest
proportion is attributable to low A.L. (1), whereas sample N provided proportions of alterations making up more than 80% of the
studied assemblage, which included a much higher proportion of 2
and 3 A.L. (Fig. 8b). The ManneWhitney test conﬁrms the difference between the two samples (for alpha ¼ 1%). The statistical
power of this test (macro developed by G. Le Pape, Tours, France), is
excellent (95%), which means that the number of measurements
(150) is more than satisfying to accept the Ha hypothesis (the two
samples originate from different statistical populations). These ﬁrst
results allow us to propose the hypothesis according to which a
correlation between the macroscopic and microscopic state of
wood exists and is still detectable after charring. The purpose of
additional experimental work is to verify this hypothesis, but also
to acquire a ﬁner picture of the alteration patterns.
3.3. Experimental validation
3.3.1. Protocol (Fig. 9)
Experimental combustion was conducted under strictly
controlled conditions, by deﬁning exactly the most relevant parameters. The wood was collected on the high plateaux of AlpesMaritimes (France) where forest stands of P. sylvestris (Scots pine)
in different states of decay were sighted (Table 2). The use of
another species, P. sylvestris (and not Larix), for the experiments is
justiﬁed by the fact that P. sylvestris is signiﬁcantly more frequent
than Larix decidua in European prehistoric sites, and that it possesses a resistance comparable to that of Larix spp. towards fungi
and bacteria (Triboulot, 2002). On the ﬁeld, small logs and branches

Table 2
Description of the ethnographic and experimental batches.
Label

Species

Soundness

Collected tree (T)
or ground (G)

Anatomical
element

General description

N (hide smoking ﬁre)

Larix cajanderi

G (þT)

Stump

Wood dark red, very altered, crumbling

S (smudge ﬁre)

Larix cajanderi

Rotten (þ braises
from healthy wood)
Healthy (þ dead branches)

T (þG)

Branches, trunk

ST1; ST2 (standing dead)
FD1; FD3 (fallen dead)
FD2 (fallen dead)
HRST (half-rotten)

Pinus
Pinus
Pinus
Pinus

Dead
Dead
Dead
Half rotten

T
G
G
G

Branches
Branches
Branches
Stump

R1; R2 (rotten)

Pinus sylvestris

Rotten

G

Branches (?)

H1; H2 (healthy)

Pinus sylvestris

Healthy

T

Branches

Healthy appearance þ some greyish elements
without bark
General healthy appearance, locally greyish,
partially without bark
Wood greyish, mostly without bark
Wood red-brownish, altered, no bark,
beginning to crumble
Wood red (R1) to dark red (R2), altered,
crumbling, no bark
Healthy appearance

sylvestris
sylvestris
sylvestris
sylvestris

Table 3
Microscopic criteria for the identiﬁcation of the A.L.
Alteration Level (A.L.)

Alteration intensity and
presence on charcoal
Applying average
General form of wood structure

No micromorphological
signs of decay
None, or very localized A.L. 1

Cavities in cell walls; minor
cell deformations
Low intensity or very localized A.L. 2

Perforated cell walls; cell deformation;
and/or localized voids in cellular structure
Medium intensity or very localized A.L. 3

Collapsed cell walls; major cellular
deformations and/or important voids
High/very high intensity; generalized

A.L. 0 þ localized A.L. 1
Not affected

A.L. 1 þ very localized A.L. 2
Not affected

A.L. 1 þ at least equivalent surface of A.L. 2
Slightly affected; taxon remains identiﬁable

A.L. 2 þ at least equivalent surface of A.L. 3
Affected taxon can be difﬁcult to identify

327

in different states were sampled, from healthy looking, standing
dead, to fallen, red, crumbling and rotten wood.
Previous to combustion, the wood was observed, measured and
divided into three categories: standing dead wood (2 lots: SD1,
SD2), fallen dead wood (3 lots: FD1, FD2, FD3), rotten wood on the
ground (3 lots: HRST, R1, R2). One additional reference batch
composed of healthy wood (H1 and H2) was also selected. Systematic replicas allow comparisons within a comparable experimental modality (respectively 2, 3, 3 and 2 combustions). A total of

Fig. 4. Microscopic alteration level 0.

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Alteration features

328

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

After the combustion process, the totality of the charcoal was
dry-sieved and the fraction of 2e4 mm was selected for systematic
anatomical observation on the charcoal according to the method
used on the Evenk samples.
Control sub-samples of each batch (slices 4 cm thick) were
burned in a mufﬂe furnace (wrapped inside aluminium foil and
covered by sand). The samples were placed into the furnace one
hour after the combustion temperature (500  C) was reached for
45 min. Then, they were removed from the furnace and left under
the sand until they reached room temperature and observed under
the microscope according to the three sections of wood.
3.3.2. Results
All of the following quantitative results are synthesized in
Fig. 10a.
3.3.2.1. Healthy wood. Batches H1 and H2 are quite similar and
characterized by a very high proportion of unaltered charcoals
(84e86%). Low intensities of alterations are recorded (7e11%), as
well as high A.L. (2 and 3); however, the latter do not exceed 10% of
the assemblage. Altogether with the values obtained for sample S,
this seems to indicate that green wood is not exempt from being
locally colonized by degradation agents, but that alteration proportions and levels remain low.
3.3.2.2. Dead wood. The results obtained for dead wood show
more variability. This can be explained by the fact that their
macroscopic state ranged from healthy looking dead wood with its
bark still on, to medium altered dead wood, characterized by a
greyish colour and partly or completely exempt of bark (samples
SD1 and SD2, FD1, FD2, and FD3). All these last samples share
nevertheless common overall characteristics: a much lesser proportion of unaltered charcoals than healthy/green wood (between
31 and 59%), which results in a concomitantly higher proportion of
alteration features. Among the latter, it is to note that A.L. 1 predominates (between 25 and 42%). A.L. 2 is also signiﬁcantly higher
than in healthy wood (15e22%); A.L. 3 remains quite low (1e8%).
Interestingly, sample FD2, the only one composed from grey, fallen
dead wood without bark, although following the general trend,
shows the highest proportions of altered charcoals. According to
these results, it does not seem possible to discriminate standing
dead wood from not very decayed lying dead wood. This was expected, since they have the same macroscopic appearance.

Fig. 5. Microscopic alteration level 1.

10 experimental combustions were made in an open ﬁreplace under laboratory conditions, in order to obtain samples charred under
conditions that better resemble the archaeological reality (i.e. in an
open ﬁre where temperatures vary according to the state and
calibre of the wood and its position in the hearth), but by limiting
meteorological effects (wind, atmospheric humidity, ﬁreplace
shape, etc.). Fires were lighted with a blowtorch and temperatures
were simultaneously recorded using sensors distributed within the
wood.

3.3.2.3. Rotten wood. According to its description as a “half-rotten”
stump, HRST shares microscopic characteristics with the dead
wood batches (i.e., A.L. 1 ¼ 39%) but with somewhat higher A.L.
proﬁles: A.L. 0 drops to 16% whereas A.L. 2 raises to 33% and A.L.
3e12%.
These changes in the different A.L. proportions are even clearer
for rotten wood assemblages, characterized by very low proportions of unaltered charcoal (3e6%) and the predominance of A.L.
2 (24e46%) and/or 3 (18e58%). The important variability of these
percentages might be linked to the initial state of the wood batches
used for the experiments, with R1 being less altered than R2, but
may also remind us that the A.L. were established for the purpose of
this study on speciﬁc micromorphological grounds only, A.L. 2
representing “medium” values which however already correspond
to high, although localized, cell wall alterations. Accordingly to our
initial hypothesis, rotten wood shows high frequencies of alteration, with A.L. 2 and 3 being frequently recorded.
These results show that a gradual tendency from healthy to
rotten wood exists in the evolution of the proportions of the
different A.L., which appears to follow our initial classiﬁcation of
the macroscopic state of the wood.

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

329

Fig. 6. Microscopic alteration level 2.

3.3.3. Statistical reliability of the results
In order to verify the signiﬁcance of these differences, we ran
a statistical test of multiple pairwise comparisons. The resulting
classiﬁcation into seven groups conﬁrms that at least two samples are clearly different (Fig. 10b). The relatively high number of
statistical groups and their partial overlapping reﬂects in our
sense quite accurately the gradual nature of wood decay. The
classiﬁcation order of the groups conﬁrms the link between
microscopic alteration features and initial macroscopic state of
the wood (with H1 representing the healthiest lot and R2 the
most decayed):
- Groups A and B: dominant healthy signature
- Groups C, D, E: dominant dead wood signature (low to medium
decay);
- Groups F and G: dominant rotten wood signature

Accordingly, highly signiﬁcant differences (p-values of 0.001 and
lower than 0.0001) do exist between healthy, dead and decayed
wood (Fig. 10c). The ethnographic samples ﬁt quite well into this
framework, with the samnin sharing characteristics of groups B and
C, which reﬂects both the use of healthy (green) and dead wood.
Sample N on the contrary is strictly associated with rotten wood
(group F), which means that the ember added to ignite the hearth
did not mask the main information, although it might have slightly
impacted our results, i.e. a statistical difference with batch R2, the
only sample composing group G, and quite high proportions of A.L.
0 (16%) when compared to batch R1 (6%) and R2 (3%).
3.4. Proposal of an alteration index
Experiments conﬁrm that a quantitative study of microscopic
Alteration Levels visible on charcoal assemblages allows

330

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Fig. 7. Microscopic alteration level 3.

interpreting the initial macroscopic state of the wood. Statistical
tests are well suited for determining the differences between the
experimental reference sets and thus, for validating the proposed
method. However, the more reference samples there are, the more
statistical groups are potentially created, including groups whose
differences may be statistically, but not actually, signiﬁcant, at
least for our purpose. In other terms, the thresholds between
different states of wood have to be redeﬁned by including the
initial appearance of the experimental material and the corresponding alteration values on charcoal. For example, samples such
as HRST or S, belonging to key-intermediary positions, can
therefore be used to mark the limits between different alteration
groups.
This is a necessary step for reaching the primary goal of any
experimental approach, i.e. proposing a methodology allowing an
easy integration and comparison of external data into the framework of the reference values.
In order to fulﬁl this objective, we created an alteration index
based on the frequency of alteration (total %) as well as its intensity

(% of each A.L.). The alteration index Ai was obtained by adding all
altered charcoals multiplied by their respective alteration level,
divided by a theoretic maximal A.L. of 3 on each fragment, and
multiplied by the total number of fragments studied:
Ai ¼ ((nA1x1 þ nA2x2 þ nA3x3)/nTOTx3). We chose this calculation in order to obtain an index ranking from 0 to 1 that would
facilitate the reading (Fig. 11). According to the resulting graph, a
low index (<0.15) corresponds to a healthy batch of wood (Ai of
batch H1: 0.06). Medium values, as obtained for dead wood (from
0.2 to 0.34), signal light to medium alterations, whereas values
higher than 0.5 characterize a batch of rotten wood (Ai of R1 ¼ 0.56;
N ¼ 0.6; R2 ¼ 0.8). Very low and very high indices give a clear idea
of the state of the large majority of the wood pieces composing the
batch, whereas medium indices can result from the constant
recording of medium values, or from average values of a mixture of
wood in different states. However, a detailed examination of the
different A.L. proportions comprising the samples (as shown in
Fig. 8 or 10a) may lead to a better interpretation of the degree of
alteration.

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

331

Fig. 8. Quantiﬁcation of the different A.L. composing the ethnographic samples.

4. Discussion: from present-day to archaeological samples
4.1. Beneﬁts of an ethno-experimental approach
The microscopic approach carried out on ethno-experimental
charcoals allowed us to discriminate clearly highly altered wood
from healthy but also from dead, lightly to moderately, altered

wood. While the strictly experimental samples furnished a quite
complete reference set applicable to the study of charcoal samples
from coniferous woods, the results obtained for the Evenk hearths
allowed a ﬁrst evaluation of the approach of applying real-life
conditions, which is always more complex than the experimental
simulations. At the same time, the ethnographic material allowed
us to conﬁrm the validity of our method and its limits: in the

Fig. 9. Experimental protocol.

332

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Fig. 10. Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis of ethnographic and experimental results.

speciﬁc and known context of Evenk pastoralist settlements, a
“blind” study of such hearths, which are culturally signiﬁcant,
would lead to the clear identiﬁcation of the nature and the function
of the hide-smoking hearth, and, moreover, give seasonal information on the occupation of the settlement, since hides not usually
smoked in winter (Henry et al., 2009). On the other hand, the
characterization of the degradation features present on the charcoals from the samnin did not lead to a precise interpretation of its
function, since it only indicated a globally healthy to very slightly
altered wood. In such cases, other approaches focussing not on the
soundness, but on the moisture content of the wood (green/

ryseasoned), may be more adapted once fully developed (The
Parisot and Henry, 2012).
Given the potential problem that was identiﬁed, of mixtures of
wood in different states, the archaeological situation appears even
more complex in terms of charcoal mixtures and/or palimpsests in
the archaeological layers.
4.2. From the charcoal deposit to its interpretation
More speciﬁcally, scattered charcoal assemblages are the commonest within archaeological sites. Since they usually synthesize

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

333

Fig. 11. Alteration Index (A.I.) of the ethnographic (stars) and experimental (squares) charcoal assemblages.

the episodes of wood procurement and use that occurred during
the formation of the archaeological layer, they are well suited for
palaeoenvironmental reconstructions (Chabal, 1997). Applying our
method to such assemblages may be questionable in the sense that
it is difﬁcult to assess whether “medium” Ai obtained on heterogeneous samples may correspond to a recurrent pattern in wood
selection strategies (i.e. systematic acquisition of dead wood) or, on
the contrary, the sum of alternating selection practices (healthy
plus rotten plus dead wood). On the other hand, extremely low or
high Ai, even obtained on scattered charcoal, may accurately reﬂect
the main soundness of the wood.
In any case and for all types of charcoal deposits, the decision
regarding when to study and how to interpret the state of the wood
has to be made in the light of the nature of the charcoal remains
(preservation state, quantity, origin), but also of the quality and
completeness of the archaeological data (possibility of spatial analyses, availability of data about site function and/or duration of
occupation, etc.).
Moreover, if our experimental results are valid for charred material, (i.e. already altered by the combustion process), we cannot
discard straightaway the possibility of a differential postdepositional behaviour of charcoal fragments according to the
state of the wood they originate from. Experimental simulations of
ry-Parisot, 1998,
the taphonomic processes affecting charcoal (The
ry-Parisot and Chabal, 2010; Chrzavzez, 2013;
2001; The
Chrzavzez et al., 2014) tend to show that even though charcoals
from decayed wood seem to fragment faster during processes in
which water is involved (i.e. desiccation/waterlogging and freezeethaw), they are not systematically more vulnerable when
compared to charcoals from healthy wood. Nevertheless, it would
be interesting to know if the observed fragmentation equally applies to the charcoals composing each sample, or if it affects the
fragments with the highest A.L. ﬁrst, modifying our image of the
alteration patterns. This last issue should be approached experimentally, but it does not inhibit us from beginning to test our
method on archaeological material, especially since other multiple
factors may inﬂuence the preservation of charcoal deposits to a

higher extent than the initial state of the wood. Among these, direct
exposure to weathering processes and mechanical pressures such
as trampling highly affect charcoal (Chrzavzez et al., 2014). Therefore, and until new experimental data are available, a good
knowledge of the taphonomic history of the site and its features as
it can be provided by geo- and micromorphological analyses can
help determine the potentially more suitable sampling contexts.
For all the reasons cited above, the approach presented here should
be transposed very carefully to archaeological situations. It seems
to be especially pertinent for the study of punctual, chronostratigraphically and spatially secure combustion features. The
very possibility of proposing socio-economical interpretations for
charcoal concentrations e which are often considered improper for
palaeoenvironmental reconstructions because of their limited nature (Chabal, 1997; Chabal et al., 1999; Asouti and Austin, 2005)- reestablishes the study of hearths as an important part of charcoal
analysis.
4.3. Firewood in different states: archaeological implications
A couple of decades ago, the state of the wood used in ancient
hearths was already considered in anthracological theory-building
as a parameter inﬂuencing past ﬁrewood management systems in
terms of human choices and behaviours, which in ﬁne affect our
perception of past vegetation (Shackelton and Prins, 1992). More
recent postulates on the implications of the use of dead and rotten
wood by prehistoric groups also concern acquisition strategies and
ry-Parisot, 1998, 2001,
techniques and speciﬁc hearth functions (The
ry-Parisot and Meignen, 2000; The
ry-Parisot and
2002a, 2002b; The
Texier, 2006; Henry et al., 2009).
4.3.1. State of the wood, fuel collecting strategies and
palaeoecological reliability
At a theoretical level, prehistoric ﬁrewood collecting strategies
can be deﬁned in terms of cutting green wood or gathering dead
ry-Parisot, 1998, 2001, 2002) and their modalities, such
wood (The
as a pronounced taxonomic choice or, on the contrary, the use of a

334

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

broad spectrum of species (Henry et al., 2009). Observing fuel
acquisition and use in real-life conditions nuances this general
theoretical framework and illustrates how certain practices can be
directly linked to environment and culture which play, at several
levels, a signiﬁcant role in human decision-making. For instance,
the relatively low biodiversity of the boreal forest and especially, of
the open L. cajanderi (larch) woodland, is reﬂected in the limited
ﬂoristic composition of Evenk hearths, but the latter can only be
explained completely by the strong preference for larch shared by
several Evenk groups (Lavrillier, 2007; Brandisauskas, 2007;
Anikhovskij et al., 2012). In sum, we are in a situation of low
biodiversity but with a biomass abundant enough to allow basing
ﬁrewood management on a differential use of the state of the wood
as a response to well-deﬁned needs.
According to our ethno-experimental results, a healthy wood
signature corresponds to dominant proportions of green wood, or
testiﬁes to the capacity of humans to dry wood in optimal conditions, since standing dead wood collected in the forest showed
higher alteration patterns. Therefore, a healthy signature allows
highlighting the practice of woodcutting, which implies that effort
was put into the acquisition of standing trees.
In anthracology, this practice is traditionally opposed to wood
gathering, which refers to the selection of dead wood, i.e. the
“necromass” mostly represented by lying dead wood of small
rycalibre, but also by fallen trees and standing dead wood (The
ry-Parisot et al.,
Parisot, 1998, 2001, 2002; Henry et al., 2009; The
2011). Dead wood is considered appropriate for hunteregatherer
short-term occupations since it is already seasoned and thus,
directly useable in the hearth. The selection of available dead wood
for immediate use may imply that the state of the wood is more
important than the taxon and therefore, limits a choice of the
ﬁrewood based on the species (which, by extension, may lead to a
better palaeoecological reliability of the charcoal assemblage). This
behaviour, close to what Shackelton and Prins (1992) deﬁned as
“the principle of the least effort” (PLE), can be identiﬁed archaeologically by combining traditional anthracology with A.L. studies.
The higher the Ai appears, the lower is the probability that sound
wood was employed, which may be linked to high proportions of
wood at an advanced stage of decay in the local environment,
reﬂecting strategies focused on the acquisition of fallen dead wood.
Fallen wood is easier to obtain without tools such as axes or adzes;
however, it represents only a part of the whole necromass, which
itself is less abundant than green wood. In other terms, greater
rydistances have to be covered for acquiring dead wood (The
Parisot and Meignen, 2000). This is corroborated by our ethnographic observations among Evenks, with green wood acquisition
distances representing ¼ or less of the distances covered to harvest
standing dead wood, whereas fallen dead wood represented only a
very small part of the fuel since all of it was used on the ﬁrst days of
occupation. Moreover, we already saw that fallen wood can become
unavailable due to an important snow cover, which makes it easier
for Evenks to harvest standing trees of small diameter with a small
axe, a good knife or even manually, when they need to make a
campﬁre while they are on herding or hunting expeditions (Henry
et al., 2009; Lavrillier, pers. comm).
These examples show how the identiﬁcation of the state of the
wood provides some insights into acquisition techniques and distances, contributes to the formulation of hypotheses about the
palaeoecological reliability of the charcoals and may even be
complementary to seasonality studies.
4.3.2. State of the wood and hearth type and function
The preferred fuel of the Evenks is standing dead larch (Larix
sp.), because it provides more heat than green wood. It is a good
fuel for the stove, since it produces a reasonable amount of ash

(Henry, 2011). This opinion changes radically according to the
combustion feature (stove vs. open ﬁre) and its function (specialized vs. unspecialized). A greater variability of states and sometimes, of species, are used in open, outdoor campﬁres, since (i) log
calibre and ash production don't matter and (ii) they have more
general, or several successive functions. At the Evenk autumn
camp, for instance, the main campﬁre was fed with healthy looking
dead wood only when more heat needed to be obtained for cooking; otherwise it functioned basically as a samnin.
On the other hand, specialized (i.e. mono-functional) outdoor
ﬁres require speciﬁc fuels that ensure the success of the thermal
treatment. Conifers, for instance, are absolutely not adapted to the
smoking of ﬁsh (which was not performed during our stay) since
their use results in a black colour and a bitter taste. In the same way,
hilt
e is the only adequate fuel for smoking hides. Its acquisition is an
active process that can take up to ﬁve times longer than cutting
standing wood, since wood at this stage of decay can be difﬁcult to
ﬁnd in the local environment. In such contexts, it appears that it
would be difﬁcult for a “random” dead wood collecting strategy to
exceed Ais of 0.5; therefore, a higher Ai may indicate a deliberate
use of rotten fuel for speciﬁc activities, as shown by a range of
ethnographic studies. Indeed, several people all over boreal Siberia
and northern America take advantage of the diminished combustion properties of rotten wood for smoke production. In northern
environments dominated by conifers, spruce (Picea spp.), larch
(Larix spp.) and/or pine (Pinus spp.) are burned rotten for hide
smoking, but also for repelling mosquitoes (Osgood, 1936; Nelson,
1986; Beyries, 1999, 2002, 2008; Alix and Brewster, 2004;
Brandisauskas, 2007, 2010; Lavrillier, 2007; Henry et al., 2009;
Anikhovskij et al., 2012). In more southern vegetation areas and/
or other cultural contexts, they are used concomitantly with -or
replaced by-other fuels (Binford, 1967; Skibo et al., 2004; Skibo and
Fisher, 2009). Thanks to our method, it becomes possible to
investigate archaeological testimony to this widespread phenomenon and to contribute to a better knowledge of the technical traditions linked to the use of ﬁre.
Therefore, we propose that charcoal assemblages from coniferdominated environments with a very high Ai characteristic of
crumbling, rotten wood, may in particular be investigated along
with other archaeological evidence (shape of the hearth, burned
artefacts, use-wear analyses) in order to formulate hypotheses
regarding different hearth functions.
5. Conclusion
Ethnographic analogy helps us to understand in what ways
ﬁrewood selection and hearth function are interconnected within
given socio-economical contexts. They also broaden our research
perspectives and experimental datasets by showing through concrete examples, in which all the parameters of ﬁrewood management systems are observable, how hearth function can be linked to
site function and how these parameters can be revealed through
archaeological charcoal analysis.
In light of the coherence of the results obtained both on
ethnographic and experimental material, the microscopic characterization of biological alteration of charcoal has contributed to the
understanding of the relationship between macroscopic and
microscopic alteration features on P. sylvestris and Larix.
The alteration index, calculated from the proportions of altered
charcoals and alteration levels per assemblage, allows us to
formulate archaeological hypotheses concerning the macroscopic
state of wood ante combustion. The perspective of being able to
discuss the physical integrity of the wood used in ancient hearths is
particularly promising for archaeological research, since it allows
highlighting speciﬁc hearth functions, therefore contributing to the

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

identiﬁcation of site function. More generally, an advanced analysis
of the fuel used in archaeological combustion structures contributes to their techno-functional characterization, which is fundamental in apprehending the technical motivations and limitations
of past groups. It is complementary to ethnographic analogy, as
both approaches can be combined to better understand the variability of past and present practices and avoid too narrow
interpretations.
Since not all species respond equally to fungal attacks, further
studies will focus on other taxa such as different kinds of hardwoods or other conifers with different resistance to fungi.
Acknowledgements
This work was carried out in context of a Ph. D. Thesis at the
CEPAM laboratory (UMR 7264 CNRS, Nice, France) and a postdoctoral fellowship funded by the University of Nice.
The ethnoarchaeological ﬁeldwork in Siberia was funded by the
French Ministry of Research, project ACI TTT “Adaptations biologiques et culturelles: le syst
eme renne” (dir. S. Beyries, UMR 7264
CNRS).
SEM Photographs were taken at the CEMEF-Mines Paris-Tech
laboratory (Valbonne, France).
The authors are grateful to: E. Zavadskaya and A. Zabijako (State
University of Amur Region, Russia), the Evenks interviewed in
Selemd
zinskij Rajon (Amur Region) and especially Raysa Nikiforova
and Egor Struchkov, who allowed the sampling (and destruction!)
of their hearths, S. Costamagno (CNRS UMR 5608 TRACES, France)
and A. Lavrillier (University of Versailles, France). Thanks to A.
Pokhlebkin and P. Anderson for the editing of the manuscript.
References
Alix, C., Brewster, K., 2004. Not all driftwood is created equal: wood use and value
along the Yukon and Kuskowim Rivers, Alaska. Alaska J. Anthropol. 2 (1), 2e19.
, E., Euba, I., Sole
, A., 2009. Charcoal taphonomy: the study of the cell structure
Allue
and surface deformations of pinus sylvestris type for the understanding of
formation processes of archaeological charcoal assemblages. J. Taphon. 7 (2e3),
57e72.
Anikhovskij, S.A., Voronkova, E.A., Zabiyako, A.P., Kobyzov, R.A., 2012. Evenki priamurja : olennaja tropa istorij i kultury. Amurskij gosudartsvennij Universitet,
Centr po cokhraneniju istoriko-kulturnovo nacledija Amurskoj Oblasti,
Blagoveschchensk.
Asouti, E., Austin, P., 2005. Reconstructing woodland vegetation and its exploitation
by past societies, based on the analysis and interpretation of archaeological
wood charcoal macroremains. Environ. Archaeol. 10, 1e18.
n, Y., 2004. La presencia de hongos e insectos xilo
fagos en el carbo
n
Badal, E., Carrio
 gico. Propuestas de interpretacio
n. Avances en Arqueometría. Pubarqueolo
diz.
licaciones de la Universidad de C
adiz, Ca
Beyries, S., 1999. Ethnoarchaeology: a method of experimentation. Urgesch. Mater.
14, 75e88.
Beyries, S., 2002. Le travail du cuir chez les Tchouktches et les Athapaskans : imologiques. In: Beyries, S., Audouin-Rouzeau, F. (Eds.), Le
plications ethno-arche
histoire a
 nos jours, XXIIe rencontres internationales
travail du cuir de la pre
ologie et d'histoire d'Antibes APDCA, Antibes, pp. 143e159.
d'arche
lisation du travail du cuir en ethnologie: proposition d'un
Beyries, S., 2008. Mode
me ouvert a
 l'arche
ologie. Anthropozoologica 43 (1), 9e42.
syste
Binford, L.R., 1967. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in archaeological reasoning. Am. Antiq. 32 (1), 1e12.
Blanchette, R.A., 2000. A review of microbial deterioration found in archaeological
wood from different environments. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 46, 189e204.
Blanchette, R.A., Krueger, E.W., Haight, J.E., Akhtar, M., Akin, D.E., 1997. Cell wall
alterations in loblolly pine wood decayed by the white rot fungus Cerioporiopsis
subvermispora. J. Biotechnol. 53, 203e213.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., 2008. Morphological, chemical and physical changes during
charcoaliﬁcation of wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 35 (9), 2434e2445.
Brandisauskas, D., 2007. Symbolism and ecological uses of ﬁre among OrochenEvenki. Sibirica 6, 95e109.
Brandisauskas, D., 2010. Hide tanning and its use in the taiga: the case of OrochenEvenki reindeer herders and hunters of Zabaikalye (East Siberia). J. Ethnol.
Folklor. 4 (2), 97e114.
 la connaissance des paysages passe
s:
Chabal, L., 1994. Apport de l'anthracologie a
performances et limites. Hist. mesure IX, 317e338.

335

^ts et socie
te
s en Languedoc (Ne
olihique ﬁnal, Antiquite
 tarChabal, L., 1997. Fore
thode et pale
 oe
cologie. Documents d'arche
ologie
dive). L'anthracologie, me

française63. Editions
de la Maison des sciences de l'homme, Paris.
ry-Parisot, I., 1999. L'Anthracologie. In:
Chabal, L., Fabre, L., Terral, J.F., The
re, A. (Ed.), La botanique. Errance, Paris, pp. 43e104.
Ferdie
rimentale de la conservation des charbons de
Chrzavzez, J., 2013. Approche expe
olithiques : Processus post-de
positionnels, fragbois dans les gisements pale
sentativite
 des assemblages anthracologiques. PHD Unimentation et repre
 de Nice Sophia Antipolis.
versite
ry-Parisot, I., Fiorucci, G., Terral, J.-F., Thibaut, B., 2014. Impact of
Chrzavzez, J., The
post-depositional processes on charcoal fragmentation and archaeobotanical
implications: experimental approach combining charcoal analysis and biomechanics. J. Archaeol. Sci. 44, 30e42.
trequin, A.-M., Pe
trequin, P., 2007. La gestion du bois de feu: un
Dufraisse, A., Pe
cologiques. Approche ethnoarche
ologique dans
indicateur des contextes socio-e
e indone
sienne). In: Besse, M. (Ed.),
les Hautes terres de Papua (Nouvelle Guine
 te
 s ne
olithiques, des faits arche
ologiques aux fonctionnements socioSocie
conomiques. Actes du 27e colloque interre
gional sur le Ne
olithique (Neue
^tel, octobre 2005). Cahiers d'Arche
ologie Romande, Lausanne, pp. 115e126.
cha
Gur-Arieh, S., Mintz, E., Boaretto, E., Shahack-Gross, R., 2013. An ethnoarchaeological study of cooking installations in rural Uzbekistan: development
of a new method for identiﬁcation of fuel sources. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40,
4331e4347.
Hakala, T.K., Maijala, P., Konn, J., Hatakka, A., 2004. Evaluation of novel wood-rotting
polypores and corticioid fungi for the decay and biopulping of Norway spruce
(Picea abies) wood. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 34, 255e263.
oenvironnements et gestion du bois de feu au Me
solithique
Henry, A., 2011. Pale
ologie et expe
ridans le sud-ouest de la France: anthracologie, ethno-arche
mentation (Ph. D. Thesis). University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis. http://tel.
archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00726927 (accessed 06.01.14.).
ry-Parisot, I., Voronkova, E., 2009. La gestion du bois de feu en fore
^t
Henry, A., The
ale: arche
o-anthracologie et ethnographie (re
gion de l'Amour, Sibe
rie). In:
bore
ry-Parisot, I., Costamagno, S., Henry, A. (Eds.), Fuel Managment during the
The
Palaeolithic and Mesolithic Period. New Tools, New Interpretations. Proceedings
of the XV World Congress (Lisbon, 4e9 September 2006). Archaeopress, Oxford,
pp. 13e33.
Ingold, T., 1980. Hunters pastoralists and ranchers: reindeer economies and their
transformations. Cambridge studies in Social Anthropology. Cambridge University Press.
Irbe, I., Andersons, B., Chirkova, J., Kallavus, U., Andersone, I., Faix, O., 2006. On the
changes of pinewood (Pinus sylvestris L.) chemical composition and ultrastructure during the attack by brown-rot fungi Postia placenta and Coniophora
puteana. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 57, 99e106.
Joly, D., March, R., Marguerie, D., Yacobaccio, H., 2009. Gestion des combustibles dans
ne ancien: croisement des
la province de Jujuy (Puna, Argentine) depuis l'Holoce
sultats ethnologiques et anthracologiques. In: The
ry-Parisot, I., Costamagno, S.,
re
Henry, A. (Eds.), Fuel Managment during the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic Period.
New Tools, New Interpretations. Proceedings of the XV World Congress (Lisbon,
4e9 September 2006). Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 39e56.
Lancelotti, C., Madella, M., 2012. The ‘invisible’ product: developing markers for
identifying dung in archaeological contexts. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 953e963.

dentaires chez les Evenks
Lavrillier, A., 2005. Nomadisme et adaptations se
de
rie postsovie
tique : « jouer » pour vivre avec et sans chamanes. Ph D. thesis.
Sibe
EPHE, Paris.
 long terme chez les Evenks e
leveurs
Lavrillier, A., 2007. Gestion duelle de l'espace a
rences ou cohe
rences des
de rennes et chasseurs des monts Stanovoï : interfe
es. In: Beyries, S., Vate
, V. (Eds.), Les civilisations du
zones sauvages et humanise
ologiques et
renne d'hier et d'aujourd'hui : approches ethnologiques, arche
anthropologiques, Actes des rencontres d'Antibes, 19e21 octobre 2006).
APDCA, Antibes, pp. 65e88.
Lee, K.W., Wi, S.G., Singh, A.P., Kim, Y.S., 2004. Micromorphological characteristics of
decayed wood and laccase produced by the brown-rot fungus Coniophora
puteana. J. Wood Sci. 50 (3), 281e284.
Levin, L., Villalba, L., Da Rea, V., Forchiassin, F., Papinutti, L., 2007. Comparative studies
of loblolly pine biodegradation and enzyme production by Argentinean white rot
fungi focused on biopulping processes. Process Biochem. 42, 995e1002.
Ludemann, T., Nelle, O., 2002. Die W€
alder am Schauinsland und ihre Nutzung durch
€hlerei. In: Schriftenreihe Freiburger Forstliche Forschung, Band
Bergbau und Ko
15. Forstliche Versuchs- und Forschungsanstalt Baden-Württemberg Abteilung
Botanik und Standortskunde, Freiburg im Breisgau.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F.W., Wood, B.M., Porter, C.C., 2007. Earth, wind and ﬁre:
ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34 (12),
2035e2052.
Marguerie, D., Hunot, J.-Y., 2007. Charcoal analysis and dendrology: data from
archaeological sites in north-western France. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 1417e1433.
Moskal-del Hoyo, M., Wachowiak, M., Blanchette, R., 2010. Preservation of fungi in
archaeological charcoal. J. Archaeol. Sci. 37 (9), 2106e2116.
Moutarde, F., 2007. La madera y los carbones como testigos del paleo-ambiente, la
economía vegetal y el mundo ritual del Perú precolombino. Arqueol. soc. 18,
11e36.
Nelson, R.K., 1986. Hunters of the Northern Forest, second ed. University of Chicago
Press.
 n en el Norte de Grecia del Tardiglaciar hasta el
Ntinou, M., 2002. La Paleovegetacio
Atl
antico: formaciones vegetales, recursos y usos. In: BAR International Series
1038. Archaeopress, Oxford.

336

A. Henry, I. Thery-Parisot / Journal of Archaeological Science 52 (2014) 321e336

Ntinou, M., Badal, E., Heinz, C., 1999. Resultados preliminares del proyecto etnoar gico de Sarakini (Tracia, Grecia). Comparacio
n con la antracología prequeolo
rica. In: Colectivo. Geoarqueologia i Quaternari litoral. Memorial M.P.
histo
Fumanal. Universidad de Valencia, Departamento de Geografía, pp. 179e191.
Osgood, C., 1936. Contributions to the Ethnography of the Kutchin. Department of
Anthropology Yale University, New Haven.
, E., 2011. The ethnoarchaeology of ﬁrewood managePicornell, L., Asouti, E., Allue
ment in the Fang villages of Equatorial Guinea, central Africa: implications for
the interpretation of wood fuel remains from archaeological sites. J. Anthropol.
Archaeol. 30 (3), 3750 (3).
Prior, J., Gasson, P., 1993. Anatomical changes on charring six African hardwoods.
IAWA J. 14, 77e86.
Schwarze, F.W.M.R., 2007. Wood decay under the microscope. Fungal Biol. Rev. 21
(4), 133e170.
€rner, A., Schulze, E.-D., 2006. Atlas of Woody Plant Stems.
Schweingruber, F.H., Bo
Evolution, Structure, and Environmental Modiﬁcations. Springer, BerlinHeidelberg.
Shackelton, C., Prins, A., 1992. Charcoal analysis and the principle of least effort: a
conceptual model. J. Archaeol. Sci. 19 (6), 631e637.
Skibo, J.M., Terrance, J.M., Drake, E.C., Franzen, J.G., 2004. Gete Odena: Grand Isand's
post-contact occupation at Williams Landing. Midcont. J. Archaeol. 29 (2),
167e189.
Skibo, J.M., Fisher, M.B., 2009. People and Things. A Behavioural Approach to Material Culture. Springer, New York.
ry-Parisot, I., 1998. Economie des combustibles et pale
 oe
cologie en contexte
The
riglaciaire, Pale
olithique moyen et supe
rieur du sud de la France.
glaciaire et pe
rimentation, Taphonomie (PhD thesis), Paris I Panthe
on
Anthracologie, Expe
Sorbonne University.
ry-Parisot, I., 2001. Economie des combustibles au Pale
olithique. Dossier de
The
ologique 20. CNRS Editions, Paris.
Documentation Arche
ry-Parisot, I., 2002a. The gathering of ﬁrewood during Palaeolithic time. In:
The
bault, S. (Ed.), Charcoal Analyis, Methodological Approaches, Palaeoecological
Thie
Results and Wood Uses. Proceedings of the Second International Meeting of
Anthracology, Paris, September 2000, BAR International Series,1063, pp. 243e250.
ry-Parisot, I., 2002b. Fuel management (bone and wood) during the lower
The
urignacian in the Pataud rock shelter (lower Palaeolithic, les Eyzies de

Tayac, Dordogne, France): contribution of experimentation and anthracoanalysis to the study of the socio-economic behaviour. J. Archaeol. Sci.
29, 1415e1421.
ry-Parisot, I., Meignen, L., 2000. Economie des combustibles (bois et lignite)
The
rien des Canalettes. Gall. Pre
hist. 42, 45e55.
dans l'abri mouste
ry-Parisot, I., Texier, P.J., 2006. L'utilisation du bois mort dans le site mouste
rien
The
trique des charde la Combette (Vaucluse). Apport d'une approche morphome
 la de
ﬁnition des fonctions de site au Pale
olithique. Bull. Soc.
bons de bois a
hist. Fr. 103 (3), 453e463.
Pre
ry-Parisot, I., Chabal, l, 2010. Anthracology and taphonomy, from wood gathThe
ering to charcoal analysis. A review of the taphonomic processes modifying
charcoal assemblages. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 291, 142e153.
ry-Parisot, I., dufraisse, A., Chrzazvzez, J., Henry, A., Grenouillet-Paradis, S., 2011.
The
Charcoal analysis and wood diameter: inductive and deductive methodological
approaches for the study of ﬁrewood collecting practices. Sagvntum Extra 11,
31e32.
ry-Parisot, I., Henry, A., 2012. Seasoned or green? A new method to identify the
The
use of green wood for fuel among archaeological charcoal. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39
(2), 381e388.
 naturelle visTriboulot, M.-C., 2002. Le choix des essences de bois : la durabilite
-vis des agents biologiques de de
gradation. In: Alix, C., Guiot, H. (Eds.),
a
me : Caracte
ristiques des bois de menuiserie et
Table ronde : au ﬁl du bois, the
mes transversaux ArScAn, III, Paris.
du quotidien, pp. 188e195. Cahiers des the
Tsartsidou, G., Lev-Yadun, S., Efstratiou, N., Weiner, S., 2008. Ethnoarchaeological
study of phytolith assemblages from an agropastoral village in Northern Greece
(Sarakini): development and application of a Phytolith Difference Index.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 35, 600e613.
Volk, T.J., 2000. Polypore primer: an introduction to the characters used to identify
poroid Wood decay fungi. McIlvainea 14 (2), 74e82.
~ a, L., Pen
~ a-Chocarro, L., Iban
~ ez Este
vez, J.J., 2003. Ethnoarchaeology in
Zapata Pen
the Moroccan Jebala (Western Rif): wood and dung as fuel. In: Neumann, K.,
Butler, A., Kahlheber, S. (Eds.), Africa Praehistorica. Heinrich-Barth-Institut,
€ln, pp. 163e175.
Ko
Zicherman, J.B., Williamson, R.B., 1981. Microstructure of wood char. Wood Sci.
Technol. 15, 237e249.

