Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

How heat alters underlying deposits and implications for
archaeological ﬁre features: A controlled experiment
Vera Aldeias a, b, *, Harold L. Dibble a, c, d, Dennis Sandgathe e, Paul Goldberg f, g, h,
Shannon J.P. McPherron a
a

Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany
Interdisciplinary Center for Archaeology and Evolution of Human Behavior (ICArEHB), Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
d
Institute of Human Origins, Arizona State University, USA
e
Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
f
School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia
g
€t Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Institute for Archaeological Sciences, Eberhard Karls Universita
h
Department of Archaeology, Boston University, Boston, USA
b
c

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 24 August 2015
Received in revised form
17 December 2015
Accepted 5 January 2016
Available online 27 February 2016

While it is true that the use of ﬁre is undoubtedly an important behavioral trait, ﬁre can also leave
important traces in archaeological deposits, including altering previously deposited sediments and artifacts. The set of controlled experiments reported here do not focus on ﬁre per se, but rather on the
effects of some of the most important variables underlying the transfer of heat to subsurface sediments.
These variables, including temperature, duration, sediment type, moisture, and mineralogy, are altered
here in ways that essentially bracket the range of conditions under which past ﬁres may have existed.
The results show that sediments as much as 10 cm directly below a heat source routinely reach temperatures of 200  C, with higher temperatures and greater depth of heat transfer possible with longer
durations or higher surface temperatures. One of the implications of these results is that a surface can
produce substantial thermal-alterations of archaeological artifacts and sediments deposited much earlier
in the sequence. Likewise, there are signiﬁcant implications for the analyses and chronometric dating of
thermally altered sediments and burned artifacts.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Experimental archaeology
Fire
Heat transfer
Thermal alteration
Post-depositional processes
Soil micromorphology
FTIR

1. Introduction
Although the earliest use and level of control of ﬁre is a subject
of current debate (e.g., Berna et al., 2012; Goren-Inbar et al., 2004;
Preece et al., 2006; Roebroeks and Villa, 2011; Shahack-Gross et al.,
2014), there is no doubt that pyrotechnology represents one of the
more signiﬁcant technological achievements in the history of our
species. For that reason alone, the archaeological study of ancient
ﬁres e how they were built and maintained (Mallol et al., 2013a;
March et al., 2014; Mentzer, 2014), the uses that they served (e.g.,
Attwell et al., 2015; Bentsen, 2014; Brown et al., 2009; Wrangham
et al., 1999), and generally how they contributed to human adaptations to varying circumstances (e.g., Attwell et al., 2015; Bentsen,

* Corresponding author. Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
E-mail addresses: vera_aldeias@eva.mpg.de, veraldeias@gmail.com (V. Aldeias).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.01.016
0305-4403/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

2014; Carmody and Wrangham, 2009; Wrangham et al., 1999), will
continue to be an important research focus. Fire also contributes to
archaeological research more indirectly, preserving evidence of the
local environment (in terms of the materials used for fuel) and can
help serve as an “anchor” for analyzing spatial variability in a site
(e.g., Aldeias et al., 2012; Henry, 2012; Pasto et al., 2000; Sergant
, 2001). Equally important, ﬁres
et al., 2006; Vaquero and Pasto
contribute to archaeological research by providing materials that
can be dated e either charcoal for radiocarbon, burned ﬂint for
thermoluminescence (TL) or mineral grains for optically stimulated
luminescence (OSL).
Previous archaeological experiments dealing with ﬁre have
focused on the role of different fuels (Albert et al., 2000; Braadbaart
ry-Parisot, 2014; Mentzer, 2009; The
ryet al., 2012; Henry and The
ry et al., 1996; Yravedra and Uzquiano, 2013), fuel
Parisot, 2002; The
ry-Parisot and Henry,
conditions (Sievers and Wadley, 2008; The
2012), human actions on ﬁre features (Mallol et al., 2013a; Miller

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

et al., 2010), and thermal artifact alteration (Bennett, 1999;
Boardman and Jones, 1990; Richter et al., 2011; Schmidt, 2013a;
Sievers and Wadley, 2008; Stiner et al., 1995). In addition, there
are numerous examples of how ﬁres are recognized in the
archaeological record, especially in the absence of structured
hearths (Albert et al., 2012; Aldeias et al., 2014, 2012; Goldberg
et al., 2009; Karkanas et al., 2007; Mentzer, 2014). In fact, because
the direct evidence of ﬁre, such as concentrated areas of ashes and
charcoals, is easily removed through erosion, chemical diagenesis
or post-depositional movement, the recognition of combustion
features can be based on indirect evidence such as the thermal
alteration of the sediment or the presence of burned materials (e.g.,
Alperson-Aﬁl et al., 2007; Linford and Platzman, 2004; Sergant
et al., 2006). The use of such indirect evidence, however, relies on
certain assumptions regarding the spatial proximity and contemporaneity of the hearth itself and those objects and sediments that
are thermally altered. One of the basic assumptions is that these
materials are exposed to burning roughly at the same time that the
ﬁre is active, i.e., that burned artifacts are contemporaneous with
the ﬁre.
In this paper, we will show the extent to which such burning and
other kinds of thermal alteration can occur post-depositionally due
to ﬁres that were built on top of previous occupations at a site. We
are not concerned here with the effects of ﬁre per se, but rather the
transfer of heat, which bears directly on our understanding of the
conditions under which objects and sediments may become thermally altered. It is generally expected that post-depositional heating is not a main factor, since soils and sediments are considered to
be good thermal insulators: that is, they are poor conductors of heat
and therefore temperatures drop dramatically with depth below a
heat source. Indeed, some experiments have suggested that the
heat generated from a ﬁre is limited in terms of the depth to which
it can affect underlying sediments (Bellomo, 1993; Bennett, 1999;
Brodard et al., 2015; Campbell et al., 1995; Canti and Linford,
2000; Linford and Platzman, 2004; March et al., 2014; Sievers
and Wadley, 2008; Stiner et al., 1995; Werts and Jahren, 2007).
The results of some of these experiments can be criticized, however, due to the lack of control of some important parameters, such
as the temperature of the ﬁre used, the duration of heating, and the
nature and conditions (e.g., substrate composition, water content)
of the underlying sediments. The aim of the current experiments is
to apply stricter controls on such parameters, and for this reason we
did not try to replicate actual ﬁres. Indeed, the questions being
addressed here are not how people built or maintained ﬁres, what
kinds of materials were used for fuel, or how big or of what duration the ﬁres were. Rather, our question is much simpler: how does
heat transfer to underlying sediments, regardless of the source of
the heat itself. Additionally, this experiment was not designed to
examine every possible combination of these parameters, but
rather to bracket a reasonable range of possibilities in order to
ensure that the results can be extended to most archaeological
situations. This initial experiment aims to provide a baseline for
other similar experiments.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Experimental design
Heat from a ﬁre essentially represents the transfer of thermal
energy produced by the combustion of fuel to the area surrounding
the ﬁre itself. Of the fundamental modes of heat transfer, convection (i.e., transfer of heat by the movement of a medium, such as air)
and radiation (i.e., emitted as electromagnetic waves) are the two
that primarily affect those sitting around a ﬁre who feel its warmth,
as the ﬁre warms the air and energy waves reach those surrounding

65

it. The ﬁre will also heat underlying sediments, primarily through
conduction (also called diffusion, which is the transfer of heat from
matter to matter). In turn, heat conduction through sediments is
affected by a number of factors, including the thermal conductivity
of the materials making up the deposits (e.g., quartz vs. clay minerals), the amount of moisture present, the degree of compaction
(which can reduce the size and frequency of insulating air within
voids between grains), and the difference between the temperature
of the heat source and the underlying sediment (i.e., the temperature gradient).
This experiment examines the effects of some of the most
important variables underlying these processes including the input,
or surface, temperature, the duration of surface heating, and several
variables reﬂecting the nature of the sediments themselves, especially grain size. To a lesser extent, we also investigated the effects
of mineralogy, compaction, moisture content, and the presence of
layers of ash and organic plant matter in the substrate. By controlling the experimental variables, one can isolate and identify the
speciﬁc properties that guide heat-induced alterations, and thus
obtain quantitative and predictive data.
This approach is distinct from replicative or actualistic experimentations, where the goal is to reproduce what is seen today in
the archaeological record (Lin, 2014). Previous studies dealing with
pyrotechnology have relied on actual ﬁres as a source of heat (e.g.,
Bennett, 1999; Mallol et al., 2013a; March et al., 2014; Sievers and
Wadley, 2008). However, it is difﬁcult to build a ﬁre to achieve a
particular temperature and maintain it for a speciﬁc period of time
without signiﬁcant ﬂuctuation. This is due to the fact that within a
ﬁre temperatures vary greatly depending on the type of fuel used,
its amount, and frequency of refueling (see Table 1 and references
therein). While replicative experiments such as these have undeniable value for some type of questions, they are not suitable for
understanding the individual effects of speciﬁc independent variables contributing to subsurface heat transfer, which is the question
at the core of our controlled experiments.
It is also important to bear in mind that in the social sciences,
there are different kinds of “validity” in terms of experimental
design: internal, external, and ecological (see discussion in Lin et al.,
in press). Internal validity concerns the precision of the experiment
and its reproducibility within the experimental setting, where it is
possible to conclude accurately that one or more independent
variables are responsible for variation in the dependent variables of
question. External validity refers to the potential of the experimental results to be generalized across a wide variety of contexts.
Ecological validity has to do with how “realistic” the experiments
are, and many of the actualistic studies of ﬁre mentioned above
emphasize this kind of validity. However, the problem with experiments that have high ecological validity is that by approaching
empirical reality, a much larger number of independent variables
are introduced into the experimental design. This is why, then, the
present experimental design focuses on increasing the internal and
external validity, at the expense of ecological validity. In this way,
we can show more clearly the effects of each individual independent variable in turn. A major beneﬁt of experiments with high
internal and external validity is that their results are more easily
and conﬁdently extrapolated to a broader range of conditions. This
is a major shortcoming of more ecologically valid experiments,
which have limited extrapolation potential, since their results
typically apply only to circumstances with conditions identical to
those existing in the actual experiment.
2.1.1. Laboratory-based heat experiments
For our laboratory experiments, we used a high-temperature
electric heater (from Micropyretics Heater International) which
relies solely on radiation and not convection to heat the surface of

66

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

Table 1
Maximum ﬁre temperatures (in degrees C) reported from some previous experimental ﬁres. These data included only the maximum temperature recorded and not the
duration of these peak temperatures, which is not always reported. The temperature in Bentsen (2013) was taken from a graph, whereas all other temperatures represent
exact numbers reported by the authors.* ¼ 28 campﬁres,** ¼ 6 tree stump ﬁres,*** ¼ 6 grass ﬁres.
Fuel type
Bones
Grass
Grass
Grass
Peat
Sedges
Sundried Sedges
Tree stump
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood

Max. Temp

Max. Mean temp

Reference

321

825e605
195
225***

ry-Parisot and Costamagno, 2005
The
Buenger, 2003
Bellomo, 1993
Miller and Sievers, 2012
Braadbaart et al., 2012
Miller and Sievers, 2012
Miller and Sievers, 2013
Bellomo, 1993
Stiner et al., 1995
Canti and Linford, 2000
Braadbaart et al., 2012
Bentsen, 2012
Bentsen, 2013
Sievers and Wadley, 2008
Bellomo, 1993
March et al., 2014

157
800
>800
603
250**
900e1000
995
800
800
739
670
538

the sediment. The heater is programmable to particular temperatures and duration of heating, supplying a constant temperature
throughout its 26 cm diameter. This device was mounted directly
above a 60  60  40 cm wooden box containing the experimental
sediments (Fig. 1). As the heat was applied to the surface of the
sediments, temperatures were recorded continuously for the
duration of the experiments in 1-min intervals and stored on 4
channel PCE-T390 contact thermometer devices. Each thermometer was linked to k-type thermocouple probes (from B þ B
Thermo-Technik GmbH, Donaueschingen, Germany), and these
were positioned at various depths below the surface and at
different distances from the center of the heat source (Fig. 1). In
terms of depth, one thermometer was attached to two probes at the
surface (directly under the heater and just at its edge). Three other
thermometers were linked to four probes each and these were
situated in vertical alignment at depths of 2 cm, 6 cm, 10 cm, and
20 cm below the surface. In terms of lateral distance from the heat
source, one thermometer was positioned directly below its center,
and two others at the edge of the heater and outside the heater's
diameter e that is, edge corresponds to either 10 cm (in H1eH3)
or15 cm (in H4eH13) away from the center of the heater and
outside to 20 cm away from the center (see Fig. 1).
Several independent variables that are of particular interest to
archaeological applications were individually varied, resulting in a
total of 13 experiments with different experimental conditions (see
Fig. 2). Individual laboratory experiments are named by letter H
(heat) followed by a sequential number, from H1 to H13. Two main
temperatures (targeted temperatures of ~600  C and ~950  C) were
used, although some variation occurred due to the movement of air
in the room. For most of the experiments the duration of the
heating was 6 h (after the heater achieved the programmed temperature). The exceptions were one experiment that lasted 9 h (H7),
one for 19 h (H12), and two experiments with stepped heating in
which the heat was applied for 2 h, then turned off for 2 h; for the
latter, this cycle was repeated four times (H8 and H11). Four
different types of sediment were used that varied in size and
composition: gravel (mainly quartz and quartzite grains, see
Supplementary information), quartz sand, limestone sand, and
clayey silt; these materials reﬂect a range of grain sizes and
mineralogy that may be found in archaeological sediments. For the
gravel, two levels of compaction were used: loose (meaning the
gravel was uncompacted with an abundance of intergranular void
space) and compacted (achieved by repeatedly rolling the box over
rough cobblestones). In the latter case, the degree of compaction

600*
319

was determined by how much more gravel could be put in the box
after compaction, repeating this process until no further material
could be added. This same technique was tried for the sands and
clay, but these sediments did not compact signiﬁcantly. In all cases,
the sediment was ﬁrst put into a cement mixer, which helped to
homogenize them, and then poured directly into the box. All of the
sediment types had very low moisture content (percentage of
water in clayey silt ¼ 0.06, in sand ¼ 0.058, gravel ¼ 0.71) except for
one experiment with quartz sand (H12) in which 1.6 L of water
were added to the sediment. In this case, in order to control the
moisture percentage and to homogenize its distribution within the
box, a controlled volume of water was mixed to each bucket of
sediment and these were individually added into the cement mixer
before putting it in the box. The resulting moisture content was
10%, which corresponds to half of the saturation level for this
sediment (measured to be 20%). In one experiment a 2 cm thick
layer of wood ash was added to the top of sand directly below the
heater and in another a 2 cm thick layer of potting soil containing
plant organic matter and quartz sand (Graberd from OBI brand) was
added below the surface and covered by a 1 cm thick layer of quartz
sand.
2.1.2. Field experiment
In addition to the thirteen laboratory experiments described
above (H1 through H13), we also conducted a complementary
experiment in the ﬁeld using charcoal as a fuel instead of the
electric heater. This experiment is designated as C (charcoal) 1. This
experiment allows for some comparison between an actual ﬁre and
the results obtained under laboratory conditions. This experiment
generally followed the same protocols as the ones described above.
A wooden box was ﬁlled with limestone sand containing quartz. A
small (30 cm diameter) charcoal ﬁre was started and left burning
for roughly eight hours. Every effort was made to keep the ﬁre
burning at a consistent temperature, though as is often the case in
such ﬁeld experiments with high ecological validity, ﬂuctuations
occurred in the surface temperature as fuel was depleted and
replenished. Temperature reading protocols followed the ones
described above for the set of experiments using an artiﬁcial heat
source.
2.2. Sampling strategy
After each experiment, the sediments were excavated and
photographed both in plan and proﬁle views. Visible alterations to

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

67

Fig. 1. Experimental design: a) Left e view of the experimental setting with the heater located in the center of the sediment-ﬁlled experimental box with the sets of thermometers
and multiple thermocouples. Right e view of the top of the sediments when the heat is being applied; b) Schematic drawing of experimental setup with thermometers and
thermocouple locations.

the sediments, namely the surface diameter and thickness of
rubeﬁed sediment (that is, reddened, baked sediments), were
measured and photographed. Color designations were assessed by
using a Munsell Soil color chart on dry samples. In addition to
control samples of the unburned sediment types, bulk sediment
samples were systematically taken from the surface-altered sediments and at several depths in the excavated proﬁles.
Soil micromorphology blocks were collected at the center of the
burned area using a kubiena box to ensure the undisturbed nature
of the deposits. From these, a total of 12 thin sections with dimensions of 5  7.5 cm and 30 mm thick were prepared by Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA, USA), following standard
procedures of oven drying the sediments and impregnating them
with an epoxy mixed with styrene and a catalyst. The resulting thin
sections were analyzed using a petrographic microscope at several
magniﬁcations and under plane- and cross-polarized light (PPL and
XPL). Micromorphology descriptions followed the standard terminology deﬁned by Stoops (2003) and Courty et al. (1989) e see
Supplementary information. Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR) analyses were done in bulk samples of heated and
unheated sediments, and micro FTIR (mFTIR) analyses were performed directly on thin sections taken from the heated sediments.

For bulk samples, about 0.3 mg of sample was homogenized and
powdered in an agate mortar and pestle. The ground sample was
mixed with about 40 mg of IR grade KBr powder and pressed into a
pellet using a manual hydraulic press (by Wasserman). Spectra
were recorded in transmission mode using an Agilent 660 FTIR
Spectrometer with a DTGS detector at 4 cm1 resolution and
averaging of 32 scans e see Supplementary information. mFTIR
spectra were collected with a Cary 620 FTIR microscope equipped
with a MCT detector in ATR reﬂectance mode through a germanium
crystal. The spectra were recorded at 4 cm1 resolution averaging of
32 scans between 4000 and 700 cm1 range with a 100  100 mm2
contact spot.
3. Results
The physics of heat transfer are well understood. Basically, heat
moves from higher to lower temperatures, though the rate of heat
transfer is a function of both conductivity (materials with higher
conductivity transfer heat faster) and temperature differential
(heat transfers more quickly with greater differences in temperature). With sediments beneath a heat source, temperature increases most rapidly at the surface, just below the heat source.

68

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

Fig. 2. Summary of the main experimental variables and associated experimental numbers. The values correspond to the heater targeted temperature e temperature reading
averages and experimental-speciﬁc oscillations are described in the text. Qz sand: quartz sand; Ls Sand: limestone sand; O.M.: plant organic matter. An additional ﬁeld experiment
using charcoal as fuel and labeled C1 is not represented in the ﬁgure (see text below).

Gradually, the heat travels downward through the sediment, at ﬁrst
relatively quickly (because of the greater difference in temperature
between the overlying and underlying sediments), and then progressively slowing as the sediments reach thermal equilibrium.
Because the amount of total energy at the surface is ﬁxed, the
temperature at which thermal equilibrium is achieved will be
lower at lower depths. Once the heat source is turned off, the surface begins to cool rapidly, and, in the experimental situation, this is
due to both radiation and convection as the heat dissipates into the
air. However, some of the heat continues to be transferred downward due to conduction and the temperature differential between
the overlying and underlying sediments. What this means is that, as
a function of increasing depth, underlying sediments will continue
to rise for some time after the removal of the heat source (e.g.,
Fig. 3a). All temperature data produced by this study are available
as raw research data in Supplementary Information.

3.1. Spatial distribution of heat transfer
Fig. 3a presents a clear picture of how heat is transferred
through the sediments, in this case quartz sand (H3). The temperature of the surface, just below the heater, rises quickly and then at
~30 min stabilizes at around 922  C, with the heat being applied
continuously for a total of 6 h. The heat is transferred to the underlying sediments, and although the rate of heat transfer decreases with depth, the deeper sediments continue to increase in
temperature even long after (~4e5 h) the heat source is removed.
Heat is also transferred laterally away from the heat source, though
not as dramatically because there is no thermal input directly
above. The effects of heat lateral diffusion are clearly shown in
Fig. 3b. This ﬁgure shows the temperatures at the surface (both at
the center of the heat source and immediately under its edge),
temperatures at 2 cm depth directly below the heater, and those at
the same depth in the lateral probes at the edge of the heater and

beyond the heater's edge. It is clear that there is a sharp drop in
temperatures as the lateral distance increases from the heat source,
and in fact, sediments 2 cm below the surface but directly under the
heater rise to a higher temperature than the surface immediately
adjacent but not directly below the heat source. Although not
shown here, the lateral temperatures at greater depths below the
surface taken at the edge of the heater and just outside it are even
much less affected. For instance, in this experiment the maximum
temperatures recorded from the probes just at the edge of the
heater (see Fig. 1) at a depth of 6 cm was 280  C, and 166 C at a
depth of 10 cm. In the probes located further outside the heater's
edge (20 cm from center, or 5 cm from the edge of the heater), and
at a depth of 6 cm, temperatures rose to only about 50  C over the
starting temperature.
Thus, sediments that are directly below the heat source are
heated more quickly and to a higher extent than sediments that are
located adjacent to or outside that source. The latter show almost
no change in temperature and little alteration of the sediments
should be expected. Sediments directly underneath a ﬁre will be
the ones affected by it, with temperatures dramatically dropping to
its sides, even at shallow depths.

3.2. Temperature and duration
As would be expected, the maximum temperature that can be
obtained at any depth is primarily a function of both the intensity of
heat (i.e., temperature) at the surface and the amount of time it is
maintained (see Supplementary Information). Comparing Fig. 3a
with 3c, it is clear that for the same duration of time and using the
same sediment type, a cooler source will limit the maximum
temperature that sediments can achieve. Likewise, if the duration
of heating time increases (Fig. 3c and d), then the temperature of
the sediments will rise further, although at both 6 and 9 h the most
signiﬁcant change occurs within the ﬁrst two to three hours. In

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

69

Fig. 3. Results for different experimental conditions using quartz sand. a) Experiment H3 lasting for 6 h with quartz sand showing the change in recorded temperatures in several
depths directly underneath the center of the heater. Note that the temperatures at lower depths continue to rise well beyond the time when the heater was turned off (red arrows);
b) lateral temperatures recorded in H3 experiment at the center of the heater, at its edge and outside the heater; c) and d) temperatures recorded for different durations of heat with
quartz-sand for 6 h (H4) and for 9 h (H7). Note that the lack of temperatures recorded at surface in (d) was due to batteries failing in the thermometer recording device and not to
lack of heating being applied e the heater continued the same input temperature for the whole duration of the experiment. e) Stepping of heat in H8, where during each cycle the
temperatures at depth continue to build up to higher values as highlighted by the yellow arrows for depths of 2 and 6 cm below the surface. (For interpretation of the references to
color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

terms of its archaeological implications, what is most interesting is
that with a duration of 9 h, temperatures rise to over 200  C at
10 cm below the surface. Eventually, given enough time, however,
all depths will reach thermal equilibrium and so temperatures at
each depth will stabilize and remain constant thereafter.
The graphs shown in Figs. 3 and 4 also show that temperatures
continue to rise in deeper sediments for some time after the heat
source is removed. This raises an interesting question: what would
happen to subsurface temperatures if a ﬁre were extinguished and
then restarted in the same place? Of course, if the subsurface

sediments cooled to their original starting point, the result would
be the same. But a shorter interval between ﬁre events e short
enough that the underlying sediments still retained some of the
heat e will result in increasingly higher maximum temperatures
during each cycle, as shown in Fig. 3e (H8). Comparing these results
to a constant heat at the same temperature (as in experiment H4,
see Fig. 3c), the results are almost the same. In other words,
repeated short ﬁre events built in the same location will lead to a
rise of subsurface temperatures similar to those obtained from a
longer duration ﬁre of the same temperature.

70

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

Fig. 4. Comparative results between different experimental conditions. a) Comparison between different compaction degrees using gravel; b) Results for temperature changes
between gravel (H1), quartz sand (H3) and clay (H5); c) Comparison between different moisture contents using dry quartz sand (H3) and moist quartz sand (H12). Note the
temperature plateau just below 100  C in the wet sediments (red arrows); d) Experiment H10 with an organic layer at 2 cm below the surface. The temperature records at -2 cm are
within this organic layer and show both the presence of moisture and related temperature plateau just below 100  C (red arrows), and the drop in temperature even though there
was no change in the surface temperatures (yellow arrow); e) Comparison between quartz sand (H4) versus the same sediments but with an ash layer on top (H9). The rise in
temperature in H12 sand with ash seen in the ﬁrst minutes at 2 cm reﬂects the high temperature given by the heater before it stabilized to the targeted temperature; f) Field
experiment using charcoal as fuel instead of the electric heater. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)

3.3. Heat transfer in different sedimentary variables
3.3.1. Compaction
It would be expected that these general patterns would hold for
any type of homogeneous sediments, although the absolute values
of temperature rise at various depths may vary because of the
distinct conductivities of different sediment types. Other factors
also play a role in heat conduction through a given sedimentary
proﬁle. One of these is compaction of the sediments, since the air
that ﬁlls voids between particles/clasts acts as a thermal insulator.

Again, only the gravel could be compacted to any signiﬁcant degree
(13.6% more compaction in experiment H2 vs H1, Fig. 4a). Even in
this case, only the 2 cm depth shows an important difference between the compacted and loose sediment, with an increase rate of
temperature rise in the compacted sediments when compared to
the loose ones. The lack of difference in deeper sediments is
probably due to the fact that even with the “loose” gravel some
compaction occurs due to the weight of the overlying sediments as
they were put in the box. Furthermore, in less compacted sediments e although heat transfer occurs more slowly and is less

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

71

Fig. 5. Experiment H10 using a thin layer of buried plant organic matter. a) Plan view of the rubeﬁed sediments at surface, scale is 10 cm high with 1 cm increments. b) Proﬁle view
€na box used to sample for micromorphology; note the volume loss of the organic layer in the center of the heat and the slight
of the sediments during excavation showing the Kubie
rubeﬁcation seen also underneath this black layer (red arrow), the scale is 10 cm high with 1 cm increments;. c) Flatbed scan of the thin section. Note the red hue due to rubeﬁcation
and the thin black lens overlain by whitish-burned sediments. The yellow squares mark the areas of the photomicrographs. d) Photomicrograph showing the internal structure and
contact of the organic layer with the quartz-rich sediments above and below, in PPL; scale is 1 mm. e) Detail of the organic black plant matter overlain by reddish-yellow altered
organic material, in PPL; scale is 200 mm. f) Same as (e) but in XPL. Note the calcitic birefringence of the reddish-yellow organic material. g) Detail of the sharp contact between the
reddish-yellow and the underlying black organic materials, in PPL. The scale is 100 mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)

efﬁcient e, a degree of temperature equilibrium will be reached
similar to that occurring in more compacted sediments if the heat is
applied for a long enough duration. These results highlight that
even a short-term ﬁre built on well compacted sediments (as those
typically found on archaeological contexts) will lead to a quicker
rate of temperature rise in the ﬁrst few cm below a ﬁre.

3.3.2. Different sediment types
Three different types of sediment were used: gravel, quartz
sand, clayey silt, and limestone sand (see Supplementary material).
Although the gravel and sand came from the same quarry, the
clayey silt and the limestone sand comes from different quarries.
However, in this experiment we are focusing more on the differences in grain size among these different sediment types. As presented in Fig. 4b, for similar mineralogy (gravel, quartz sand and
clayey silt) a substantial difference (50  C) in temperatures is
observed only at shallow depths of 2 cm below the surface, with
quartz-sand reaching the highest temperatures around 800  C. For
all the other depths, temperatures do not substantially vary independently of the grain sizes of the experimental sediments. Limestone sand (H13) systematically reaches the lowest temperatures in
all depths, and this is probably linked to mineralogy and the lower
conductivity of carbonates. What is important to note, however, is

that in all the sediment types, temperatures rose above 200  C at
10 cm depth, even during the relatively short heating events of 6 h.

3.3.3. Moisture content
Moisture is another variable that can affect heat transfer, especially as water reaches the temperature where its phase shifts,
changing it from a liquid to a gas. Because a phase shift requires
more energy, there is a marked decrease in the rate at which the
temperature rises, until the conversion is complete. Thus, with
moist quartz sand (H12), at each depth interval there is a distinct
temporal plateau as the temperature approaches 100  C and remains there until the water content of the deposits is eliminated
(see Campbell et al., 1995); afterward the temperature begins to rise
again (Fig. 4c). Moisture has the effect of decreasing the rate of
initial temperature increase and lowering the maximum temperature obtained; for each depth interval, this maximum is much less
than what was obtained with dry sand (Fig. 4c). While these results
are more striking in wet sand, the effects of inherited moisture
content in the air-dried clay and organic sediments is also readily
observable (see Fig. 4b and d).

72

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

3.4. Thermal insulation: the effects of organic matter and ash
Thus far, only the effect of heat transfer through somewhat
homogeneous sediments has been described. Obviously, this is
rarely the case in archeological settings, in which sedimentary
contexts are often complex and result in the superimposition of
different sediments that may contain other sorts of materials, some
of which may act as thermal insulators. This question was
addressed by applying heat to sediments containing a discrete layer
of organic matter (H10) and wood ash (H9 and H11). Both materials
are known to limit conductivity due to either their high moisture
content or low thermal conductivity (see for instance Canti and
Linford, 2000).
Considering ﬁrst the effect of organic matter, a 1 cm thick layer
of potting soil (composed of predominantly plant organic matter
mixed with some quartz sand e Fig. 6a) was placed 2 cm below the
surface and then covered with 1 cm of sand; the same sand ﬁlled
the rest of the container. Therefore, in this case, the temperature
probe located at 2 cm depth is recording temperatures directly
within the organic material. Fig. 4d shows temperatures stabilizing
just below 100  C, which was the case with the moist sand
described above and reﬂects the phase change as the moisture in
the organic matter evaporates. However, this graph then shows a
signiﬁcant drop in temperature after about four hours, even though
there was no change in the heat input at the surface (Fig. 4d). We
interpret this change in temperature to some degree of ignition of
the organic matter once the moisture has been removed. This
ignition results in release of heat in an exothermic reaction (which
is reported for temperatures exceeding 280  C, e.g., DeBano, 1990),
and this energy is added to the heat from the heater itself, thus
resulting in even higher temperatures. This effect is less marked but
still apparent at 6 cm below the surface, though hardly at all at the
10 cm depth. However, in other sediments containing a more
substantial amount of organic material, the effect should be much
more pronounced.
Substantial changes can be seen in organic matter starting
around 200  C, with reported complete loss of organic components
above 450  C (DeBano, 1989). As seen in Fig. 4d, in our experiment

temperatures did not exceed 400  C, and several aspects were
evident both during the excavation of the sediments and when
these materials were observed microscopically. In the excavated
proﬁles, there was a clear loss of volume in the organic layer located
directly below the heat source (Fig. 5). Interestingly, a thin, dark,
reddish layer was observed underneath the organic material (see
Fig. 5b and rubeﬁcation section below). Higher-resolution observations in the thin section revealed that the ﬁrst few mm of this
layer changed dramatically, and now consisted of yellowish orange
charred material with calcitic domains overlying a discrete lens of
still black organic material (Fig. 5). FTIR spectra clearly show the
mineralogical transformation of the organic material, with the
appearance of carbonate peaks within the charred layer (Fig. 6).
With experiment H9 we explored the effects of a 2 cm thick
layer composed of wood ash in the uppermost part of the heated
sediments. Normally ash would serve as an insulator with relatively
poor conductivity (Canti and Linford, 2000), and thus partially
blocking the transfer of heat to the subsurface sediments. This can
be seen in Fig. 4e, where the presence of an ash layer (H9) on the
surface is compared to an identical experiment (H4) without it. In
spite of the fact that the heater was set to a slightly higher temperature in the ash layer experiment (approximately 625  C), the
temperature at 2 cm depth barely reaches 300  C. When compared
to the quartz sand without the ash layer (where there was an
average surface temperature of ~575  C) there is a temperature
difference of 115  C at 2 cm depth. The maximum temperatures at
lower depths were also less in the ash experiment (with a difference of 86  C and 48  C for the 6 cm and 10 cm depth respectively).
Note also that there is a small spike in the 2 cm temperature in the
ash experiment, which abruptly decreases after 30 min. Again, this
is due to fragments of wood in the ash that, as in the case of the
organic matter described above, contributed to the total heat energy through combustion of the organic components. Once this
material was burned off, sediment temperature shows a slight drop
before it continues to rise, matching the energy being produced by
the heater alone.
As shown in this experiment, the effects of ash as a thermal
insulator can be an important factor in cases where stacked hearths

Fig. 6. FTIR spectra. a) transmission spectra on powdered samples, where the lower spectra shows the unheated potting soil of experiment H10, with absorptions bands of organic
material present (3405, 2926, and 1617 cm1, respectively attributed to OH stretching vibration, CeH symmetric stretching, and OH deformation) mixed with quartz (1083, 797, and
779 cm1 peaks associated with SieO stretching, and the 694, 513 and 462 cm1 peaks with CeO bending). Above are spectra from the limestone sand used in experiment H13.
1
1
After heating, the sample shows the fundamental vibrations arise from the CO2
3 ion in calcite, the asymmetric stretch (ʋ3) at 1430 cm , the out-of-plane bending (ʋ2) at 875 cm
and the in-plane bending vibration (ʋ4) at 712 cm1 and an additional vibrational at 3645 cm1. This suggest the transformation of calcite into quicklime (CaO) and CO2 and, after
exposed it reacts with atmospheric moisture forming calcite and calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2 (Toffolo and Boaretto, 2014). Thus the vibrational peak at 3642 cm1 is attributed to
the OeH stretching of the Ca(OH)2. b) mFTIR reﬂectance ATR spectra of the heated organic layer from H10 thin section. The top spectrum corresponds to the altered organic matter
layer, showing absorption bands at 1407, 871 and 713 cm1 associated with calcite [note the shift of the ʋ3 when compared with transmission spectra shown in (a)]. The exact
location of the spectra is shown in photomicrograph (c) where a larger calcitic domain was targeted (in XPL, with a 200 mm scale). The lower spectrum shows the absorption peaks
associated with the underlying resin used in thin section impregnation.

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

73

Fig. 7. Summary of visible rubeﬁcation of the sediments and associated subsurface maximum temperatures measured at the center of the heat source. Rubeﬁcation thickness data
was not collected for experiments H3 and H9. For sample H13, no visible reddening of the sediments was observed (see Fig. 8).

or secondary ashy accumulations (for instance, hearth rake-out or
ash dumps) are present. Importantly, such deposits might be
spatially localized even within a given stratigraphic layer, and a ﬁre
directly overlying such substrates will reach lower subsurface
temperatures than a similar ﬁre lit in nearby ash-free locations. In
such cases where a ﬁre is built directly on top of a previous combustion feature with an ash component (i.e., stacked hearths), we
should expect lower subsurface temperatures in the latter ﬁre than
those reached in a substrate lacking any signiﬁcant ash content. At
the same time, however, it is important to keep in mind that an
initial ﬁre will not be insulated, and so the heat of that ﬁre would
have been transferred to the subsurface sediments as usual (see
Section 3.6 below). Subsequent ﬁres, if hot enough or if they were of
sufﬁcient duration, could still contribute to the alteration of the
underlying sediments and the objects contained in them, and even
more so if combustible materials remained in the ashes of the
previous ﬁres.
3.5. Color and mineralogical sediment alterations
Fig. 8 summarizes the results of rubeﬁcation (reddening)
observed for each experiment except for H3 and H9, for which no
subsurface color data were taken. For all three sediment types there
was a systematic alteration from the unheated very pale brown
gravels and clays (10YR7/4 and 10YR7/3, respectively) and light
yellowish brown sands (10YR6/4) to a reddish yellow (5YR7/6) area
that matched the entire diameter of the surface heated area (see
Fig. 8). A further distinction in color, with an inner circle of redder
sediments, is visible in quartz sands and clays heated to temperatures of ~950  C (Fig. 8). The gray (2.5Y 6/1) limestone sand heated
to about the same temperature did not show reddening, and here
the unheated sands changed to white (10YR 8/1) with a slightly

greenish outer rim (Fig. 8). As seen in the FTIR results (Fig. 6b),
these heated sediments show the transformation of calcium carbonate to calcium hydroxide (see also Toffolo and Boaretto, 2014).
In the ash experiment (H11), we observe the complete combustion
of the black organic wood material in the center of the ashes where
the heat was more intense. This results in a slight color alteration
(from gray blackish areas to more homogeneous gray whitish ash
material) as seen in Fig. 8. No color alterations were observed
outside the surface diameter of the heat source itself, with the
sediments adjacent to this heated area remaining unaltered.
Rubeﬁcation of sediments and soils results mainly from mineral
weathering and the oxidation of iron forming iron oxides (Canti
and Linford, 2000; Schwertmann, 1993), which can be formed by
exposure to high temperatures. The degree of rubeﬁcation is
dependent primarily on two variables. The ﬁrst is the amount of
iron initially present in the sediments. For instance, calcium carbonate deposits, such as the limestone sand and ashes used here,
contain little or no iron, and in our experiments these sediments
types do not show any reddening after heating. A second variable
involved in rubeﬁcation is temperature. Fig. 7 shows that macroscopic color alterations occur above the 200  C threshold. This
onset is presumably associated with mineral transformations, for
instance from goethite to hematite, which can be induced by
thermal heating around 240  C and accompanied with a marked
changed from yellow to red colors (Cornell and Schwertmann,
2004; Ruan et al., 2002). The thickness of visibly rubeﬁed sediments directly underneath the heat source varies from a maximum
8.5 cm to only a discrete rubeﬁed lens less than 1 cm thick (Fig. 6b).
The latter occurs in experiment H11 where ash was used in the
uppermost sediments overlaying quartz sands, and it was within
the latter deposits that some reddening was observed. In the case of
organic-rich deposits, a thin 1 cm of dark reddish color was

74

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

€na boxes used for micromorphology
Fig. 8. Plan (left) and proﬁle (right) view of sediment alterations. In the proﬁle view, it is possible to see the position of the metal Kubie
sampling. Scale is 10 cm.

observed directly underlying the organic deposits, in addition to
the loss of volume and charring of the organic content described
above.
As seen in Figs. 5 and 8, when viewed in proﬁle rubeﬁcation has
a basin shape, with reddening being more extensive (thicker) in the
center of the heated deposits and thinning out to its sides. This
shape is illustrative of the way that heat transfer occurs through the
sediments, with higher temperatures reached directly underneath
the heat source and temperatures dramatically dropping laterally.
3.6. Field experiment: charcoal-fueled ﬁre
In experiment C1, charcoal was used as a fuel instead of the
electric heat source. As stated earlier, every effort was made to keep
the ﬁre burning at a consistent temperature, though as is often the
case in such ﬁeld experiments, the surface temperature ﬂuctuates
as fuel was depleted and replenished (Fig. 4f). The average temperature, however, was 790  C. The graphic pattern of heat transfer
shows the initial vaporization of the moisture at the various depth
intervals, but after two hours, the temperature at 2 cm below the
surface registered 517  C, or roughly intermediate between the
temperatures achieved under laboratory conditions for 600  C and
950  C, and this is also true for the 6 cm and 10 cm depth intervals.
Similar to the laboratory experiments, temperatures in the underlying deposits continued to rise well after the ﬁre was extinguished.
At the end of the experiment, a ~1 cm thick layer of ash was formed.
4. Discussion
4.1. Summary of results
Although the laws of thermodynamics for heat transfer have
long been understood, our purpose in this paper was to focus on
how ancient ﬁres may have affected their surrounding sediments in
ways that could affect archaeological interpretations. Other

archaeological experiments dealing with ﬁres and subsurface alterations have been carried out (Bennett, 1999; Campbell et al.,
1995; Canti and Linford, 2000; March et al., 2014; Sievers and
Wadley, 2008; Stiner et al., 1995; Wadley, 2009; Werts and
Jahren, 2007). These experiments tended to focus either on a
perspective of thermal alteration of artifacts, or under less
controlled conditions, and often with fewer variables that may
affect the processes. Table 2 compiles data on subsurface temperature from previous experiments, and shows that there is a wide
variety of values reached in each of these studies, even for similar
depths (compare with Table S1 in Supplementary Materials). For
instance, Bennett (1999) reached temperatures of 244  C at depths
of 15 cm below the surface in ﬁres lasting for 48 h, and Wadley
(2009) recorded maximum temperatures of 296  C at a depth of
10 cm. In other studies, temperatures are substantially different,
with much lower temperatures even at shallower depths (see
Table 2). This range of results can be due to differences in several
experimental parameters (such as surface temperatures, ﬁre
duration, type of substrate, moisture content, etc.), all of which
make comparisons and speciﬁc assessments difﬁcult. It is true, of
course, that archaeological ﬁres were built on many different kinds
of substrates, undoubtedly varied in terms of their intensity and
duration, the use of different kinds of fuels, the moisture content of
the fuel, and other parameters such as the amount of oxygen
available. While most camp ﬁres are thought to be of limited
duration, prolonged burning events lasting for 1e3 months are
known from ethnographic evidence (e.g., Mallol et al., 2007). Our
goal, however, was not to reproduce the effects of ﬁre under every
conceivable situation. Rather, what we tried to do here was to
bracket a number of different variables in order to arrive at
generalized results that would have the broadest possible relevance
to archaeological situations. These results are limited to simple,
general purpose ﬁres that would have been restricted in terms of
size, intensity, and duration, although the results can easily be
extrapolated to many other conditions. While the experimental

276e289 318
430

296

/

72

/

271

232e199

855e892
456e443
404
693

328

660

286e361

670

177e243
~100
~120

~150

140
80

310 145

90
70

110

90
85

~150

Temperatures recorded hourly.

408

244
73.9

506

201
72

240
280

370

480

N/A

350

100
95

a

~300
390 250

250

~250

~400
~400
500 440
475

410

620 620
N/A
680

Depth below 0 (Fire)
1
surface
1.5
(cm)
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
5
6.5
9.5
10
15
25

N/A 640

2h
Fire or recording
duration

48 h

Alﬁsols and Clayey Sand Wet, high
inceptisol
silt
clay% B
horizon
Sed./soil type

1 he1h20

610

~700

5h

~750

466e760

11 h Rec

562e730

3 h (~6 h Rec) 36 h
Rec

11 h
Rec

13 h Rec

4e6 h Rec

818e995 920
433e436 570

Sandy
loam
(Fire5)
Clay loam Gravel
(ﬁres 1e2) (ﬁres 3
e4)
N/A
N/A
Silica-rich
(Fire1) (Fire2) sand (ﬁre
3)
N/A (large ﬁres Sand
with refueling)
N/A (small
ﬁres not
refueled)
Dry,
clayey
soil
Wet,
clayey
soil
Sand Wet, silt loam Wet,
(volcanic ash) silty
loam

Bentsen, 2013
March et al.,
2014
Campbell et al. 1995
Bennett,
1999,a
Werts and
Jahren,
2007
Reference

Table 2
Temperatures recorded in the subsurface from previous studies. Compare with our max. temperatures in Table S1, Supplementary Materials.

Sievers and
Wadley,
2008

Wadley 2009

Canti and Linford 2000

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

75

conditions may strike some as being more unrealistic (i.e., lacking
in ecological validity), this is signiﬁcantly offset by the much higher
internal and external validity offered by the present experimental
design.
The temperature of a surface ﬁre is clearly one of the more
important independent variables examined in this study. Unfortunately, it is generally difﬁcult to estimate temperatures and durations achieve by past ﬁres based on the evidence of ﬁre residues
alone (Stahlschmidt et al., 2015), but many studies have measured it
experimentally. Our goal was to bracket the range of temperature
that could be obtained under most natural settings, and so other
experimental data provided the upper and lower temperatures that
we used (see Table 1). Small ﬁres fueled with grasses, leaves, and
twigs burn quickly and tend to reach only 225  C peak temperatures, although such small ﬁres would have had little to no practical
use. Experimental bone ﬁres can have temperatures of 825  C,
wood ﬁres can achieve maximum temperatures above 950  C, and
our own charcoal ﬁre, C1, had an average temperature of nearly
800  C. Using the electric heater with a lower limit of roughly
600  C surface temperature, the experimental results can be
applied to most small ﬁres, especially those of sufﬁcient intensity to
leave direct evidence in archaeological deposits. On the other hand,
our maximum limit of around 950  C may actually be a bit lower
than the peak temperatures achieved by many past ﬁres. In our
experiments temperatures were maintained for durations of normally 6 h or 9 h, and ﬁres that were maintained for even longer
periods could eventually result in higher cumulative temperature
exposures.
What our results show is that under a wide variety of conditions,
including the temperature and duration of the ﬁre, and given
varying sediments and other parameters, the heat generated by a
ﬁre will signiﬁcantly raise the temperature of sediments, and other
objects, directly underlying it. Sediments outside a direct heat input
will, on the other hand, show little or no thermal alterations, and
this is true for both laterally-buried sediments or surface sediments
just on the edge of the ﬁre itself. As it would be expected, with an
increase in heating time, temperatures below the surface will
continue to rise until a thermal equilibrium is reached. It is, however, within the ﬁrst two to three hours that the most signiﬁcant
changes occur in subsurface sediments. Thus, even small ﬁres of a
limited duration, so-called ephemeral ﬁres, could signiﬁcantly raise
the temperature of the underlying sediments.
Other variables, such as compactness, moisture content, and, to
some extent, the presence of organic matter or ash in the sediments, also affect the transfer of heat to underlying sediments. The
inﬁltration of water into underlying sediments is dependent on
several key variables, including grain size, porosity (or compactness), the proximity of groundwater or bedrock, and, of course, the
amount of water on the surface. Finer grains, such as clay, will
reduce inﬁltration, effectively serving as a barrier, while coarser
sediments, or sediments with increased porosity due to plant root
action, will allow moisture to pass through more quickly. One of the
bigger factors to consider in archaeological sites is whether or not
they were sheltered from rainfall, dripping water from a roof,
increased proximity to phreatic water level, or runoff. If they were,
then we would expect the moisture in underlying sediments to
vaporize relatively rapidly under a ﬁre, with the rate of vaporization
being a function of depth.
Organic matter works in the opposite fashion by contributing its
own source of heat as it combusts, and thus will increase the
amount of heat transferred to underlying sediments. The presence
of organic matter may be visible either macro- or microscopically,
as shown in Fig. 5. What is most interesting in this case is that the
presence of combusted, buried organic matter will have the
appearance of a surface ﬁre with charred organic matter overlaying

76

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

a thin lens of rubeﬁed substrate, as seen in experiment H10 (see
also discussion on combustion features black layers in Mallol et al.,
2013b). Without closer examination, such type of deposits may be
mistaken for a surface hearth, when in fact they are the result of
post-depositional burning resulting from a later ﬁre higher in the
sediments.
In the case of a hearth built directly above previous combustionderived sediments, if the ash component still contains organic
matter that was not completely combusted by the previous event,
this material will initially contribute to the total amount of heat
produced. However, once that is accomplished, then the ash itself
tends to act as an insulator to heat transfer. The overall effect on the
underlying sediments is somewhat complicated, however. In the
ﬁrst place, the initial ﬁre that produced a layer of ash will have
already heated the underlying sediments as described here, even
though the ﬁre is producing a layer of ash itself. This is shown in the
charcoal-fueled experiment (C1) described above. This experiment
indicates that a buildup of ash during an initial ﬁre does not
signiﬁcantly hamper the transfer of heat to the underlying
sediments.
The main point to be drawn from these experiments, then, is
that although sediments are overall poor heat conductors, a surface
ﬁre will still signiﬁcantly increase the temperature of subsurface
sediments directly underlying it and any objects within them.
While the uppermost sediments closest to the ﬁre are more greatly
affected, temperatures of sediments 10 cme20 cm below the surface can also rise signiﬁcantly, depending primarily on the temperature of the ﬁre itself and its duration.
4.2. Archaeological implications
These results have signiﬁcant implications for archaeologists.
When burned objects are recovered, even if they are not found in
association with ﬁre residues, an assumption is often made that
they were burned prior to or at the time of their deposition. The
temperature values obtained in our experimental setting shows
that substantial heat can be transferred to the subsurface and such

heat will alter other objects in the ground, including lithics and
bone (Fig. 9). Previous studies tend to focus on heat alteration of
speciﬁc artifacts, but do not help on reconstructing under which
conditions these temperatures are attained in the subsurface. There
seems to be some degree of variability in terms of the temperatures
necessary to thermally alter chert. For instance, it has been reported
that chert can begin to display thermal alteration (cracking, crazing,
and color changes) starting at 250  C, while the formation of a
luster requires temperatures around 350  C (Julig et al., 1999 and
€nder, 1983). Schmidt (2013a) reports on
citations within; Rottla
structural changes in ﬂints starting between 200 and 300  C as a
result of heating (see also Schmidt, 2013b), whereas Weiner et al.
(2015) show that ﬂints from Manot cave (Israel) have a broadening of speciﬁc FTIR peaks at temperatures above 500  C. In experiments with buried bones, Stiner et al. (1995) described black
carbonized bones at depths of 6 cm in their experimental ﬁres. In
their study, none of the buried bones, even those in shallower
depths, attained a white color associated with fully calcined conditions. However, in experiments attaining longer ﬁre durations (up
to 48 h of heating), Bennett (1999) reports on bones becoming
blackened at depths of 10 cm and gray calcined bones in shallower
depths between 2 and 5 cm. Fruits and seeds buried 5 cm or even
10 cm directly below a ﬁre can be carbonized, and this carbonization can occur at temperatures as low as 152  C if such temperatures were maintained for long durations (Sievers and Wadley,
2008). Secondary, post-depositional alteration of other types of
artifacts can also occur. For instance Wadley (2009) clearly demonstrates that the overwhelming presence of red ochre in archaeological contexts may not necessarily relate to intentional symbolic
choices, but due to post-depositional heating transforming originally yellow materials into shades of red ochre.
Examination of thermally-altered sediment may also be
misleading in terms of the reconstruction of the structure of the ﬁre
itself. Although heat transfers primarily downward, when seen in
cross-section the gradient in temperature is somewhat spherical.
Thus, when viewed in section, a ﬁre that was built on a ﬂat surface
may appear as though it was made in a depression. These results

Fig. 9. Synthesis of maximum temperatures recorded both in our high-temperature (~950  C) and low-temperature (~600  C) experiments at various depths versus the threshold
for relevant artifact alterations: 1 Bones calcined at ~650  C (Weiner, 2010); 2 Combustion of cellulose at 310  C (Werts and Jahren, 2007); 3 From 300 to 500  C combustion of the
organic component of bones (Etok et al., 2007); 4 Structural (Schmidt, 2013a) and color changes (Buenger, 2003, p. 314) in chert starting between 200 and 300  C; 5 Carbonization of
seeds and fruits at 152  C during long temperature exposures (Sievers and Wadley, 2008). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

are in agreement with observations made by Bellomo (1993) who
also describes a basin-shaped conﬁguration of the oxidized sediments underneath campﬁres. A similar feature was also present in
our C1 experiment done outside laboratory conditions and with
actual ﬁre. In the archaeological literature, there are several instances of hearths or combustion features described as being
concave-, basin-, or cuvette-shaped (e.g., Almeida et al., 2009;
Vallverdú et al., 2012; Wadley, 2012) e (see also March et al.,
2014 for experimental ﬁres built on pit features). What the experiments described here show is that this structure is not necessarily
artiﬁcial, i.e., an intentional anthropic construction, but can instead
simply be an expected result based on how heat penetrates underlying sediments.
Probably the most signiﬁcant archaeological implications have
to do with numerical chronology, including TL and OSL. Both of
these methods rely on the measurement of trapped energy accumulated since the material being dated was last reset by exposure
to sufﬁcient heat or light. Using the TL method as an example, it can
thus provide a date for when a piece of ﬂint was burned, and it is
generally assumed that this burning took place at the time or
shortly before the object was deposited. Normally, a heating to at
least 300e400  C is needed to reset a ﬂint (Aitken, 1985; Richter
et al., 2011) but less heat for longer periods can also reset or,
importantly, partially reset the clock (Aitken, 1985). As these experiments have shown, these temperatures can be achieved in a
deposit long after its deposition. In the case of Pleistocene sediments, the deposition of 6e10 cm above an object may represent
many thousands of years, and, of course, since heat can travel across
stratigraphic boundaries, the dates for an underlying layer may
represent the timing of ﬁres in an overlying layer. Thus while ﬁres
are a necessary condition for the application of TL dating, the spatial
relationship between ﬁres and heated artifacts is potentially an
important complicating factor in relating dates to particular sets of
behaviors. The same is expected to be true for OSL derived ages.
5. Conclusions
With the controlled experiments presented here, we aimed to
understand the effects of heat on subsurface sediments and
embedded artifacts. With this goal in mind, our experimental
design included a variety of the kinds of parameters under which
ﬁres might have occurred in the past e in effect bracketing the
kinds of conditions surrounding past ﬁres. The problem, of course,
is that most of these kinds of conditions are difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to assess for archaeological evidence of ﬁres. So, instead
of trying to perform experiments with sediments that match those
of a particular site or level, we tried to bracket a series of different
parameters in order to arrive at generalized inferences. Hopefully,
most of the past ﬁres that were present in most archaeological sites
fall somewhere within the range of parameters utilized here. While
some ﬁres may have been a bit hotter than our maximum temperatures, or cooler than our minimum ones, or of different durations, overall it should be possible to generalize these results to
most archaeological situations.
The results show that ﬁres systematically contribute to signiﬁcant thermal alteration of directly underlying deposits, and such
alterations have broader implications for archaeological interpretations and dating techniques. The obtained data allows us to
make the following inferences:
1. A spatially constrained ﬁre will lead to a substantial rise in
temperatures of the deposits directly underlying it, with temperature rises dropping dramatically to its sides. This shape for
lateral heat transfer is always similar, independent of the
experimental conditions. Therefore, only deposits directly

77

underlying a heat source will be thermally altered, with little or
no alteration in the sediments and artifacts outside the ﬁre area,
both in deeper or shallower depths. One should also note that
the diameter of our heated area is relatively small (26 cm in
diameter). Substantially larger surface ﬁres are known in the
archaeological record and these should lead to greater areas
being affected by the overlying heat source.
2. Although there are several variables accounting for the
maximum temperatures reached in the subsurface (intensity of
heat, its duration, sedimentary moisture, compaction, etc.), it is
within the ﬁrst two to three hours of heating that the most
signiﬁcant changes occur. A relatively-short-lived ﬁre event has,
therefore, the potential to alter underlying deposits and leave
traces that can be archaeologically discernable (e.g., burned artifacts or rubeﬁcation).
3. Our results show that under a variety of different experimental
conditions, temperatures of 200  C are routinely reached at least
at 10 cm depth in experiments lasting for 6 h. In ﬁres of longer
durations, and given that temperatures below surface continue
to rise long after the heat source is extinguished, we can envision higher temperatures being reached at these depths. How
much the temperature rises will depend on a number of factors,
including the thickness of the accumulated ash, which will
eventually start acting as an insulating layer.
4. When viewed in cross-section, thermally-altered sediments will
develop a distinctive basin-shape conﬁguration, even though
the surface was ﬂat. This speciﬁc shape reﬂects the way heat is
transferred to the underlying sediments, and should not be
misinterpreted as a ﬁre intentionally built on a depression.
Similarly, in the presence of previously buried combustible
material, a ﬁre on top of these deposits can lead to complete or
partial combustion of the organic components, resulting in deposits that can, at a ﬁrst glance, resemble a surface ﬁre event.
The experiments presented here show that substantial thermalalterations of previously buried archaeological objects and sediment can occur due to a ﬁre higher in the deposits. In certain
sedimentary contexts this may represent tens of thousands of years
between the original deposition and the post-depositional heating
of the materials. If the temperature and duration are sufﬁciently
high and long, this can result in a reset or partial reset of the clock
for luminescence dating applications, which will result in younger
apparent ages for underlying deposits. This experiment is not the
last word but serves as a well-documented case of observations on
selected variables. Further research can use this study as a springboard to investigate the basic characteristics of heat transfer by
further exploring other parameters that may have repercussions for
archaeological evidence.

Acknowledgments
€ thel, Katharina
We would like to thank Stefﬁ Hesse, Henrik Ro
€rschner for their valuable supSchilling, Marcel Weiß and Nina Do
port in raw material purchase and constructing the experimental
apparatus. Raquel Maria developed the powder FTIR analyses
rin provided
presented here. Marion Hernandez and Guillaume Gue
useful insights and comments on the effects of heat to luminescence dating and moisture content estimations. The limestone sand
used was kindly provided by Fels-Werke GmbH, Germany. Marcel
Weiß provided the wood ash used in the present set of experiments. We thank the Max Planck Society for their support of this
project. Finally, we would like to extend our acknowledgments to
the two anonymous reviewers, whose comments helped improve
the present manuscript.

78

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.01.016.
References
Aitken, M.J., 1985. Thermoluminescence Dating. Academic Press, London, Orlando
and Montreal.
Albert, R.M., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2012. Insights on Neanderthal ﬁre use at Kebara
Cave (Israel) through high resolution study of prehistoric combustion features:
evidence from phytoliths and thin sections. Quat. Int. 247, 278e293.
Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., 2000. Phytoliths in the middle
palaeolithic deposits of Kebara Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: study of the plant
materials used for fuel and other purposes. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27, 931e947.
Aldeias, V., Goldberg, P., Dibble, H.L., El-Hajraoui, M., 2014. Deciphering site formation processes through soil micromorphology at Contrebandiers Cave,
Morocco. J. Hum. Evol. 69, 8e30.
Aldeias, V., Goldberg, P., Sandgathe, D., Berna, F., Dibble, H.L., McPherron, S.P.,
Turq, A., Rezek, Z., 2012. Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc de Marsal
(France). J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 2414e2423.
Almeida, F., Moreno-García, M., Angelucci, D.E., 2009. From under the bulldozer's
claws: the EE15 Late Gravettian occupation surface of the Lagar Velho rockshelter. World Archaeol. 41, 242e261.
Alperson-Aﬁl, N., Richter, D., Inbar, N.G., 2007. Phantom hearths and the use of ﬁre
at Gesher Benot Ya'aqov, Israel. PaleoAnthropology 1e15.
Attwell, L., Kovarovic, K., Kendal, J.R., 2015. Fire in the Plio-Pleistocene: the functions of hominin ﬁre use, and the mechanistic, developmental and evolutionary
consequences. J. Anthropol. Sci. 93, 1e20.
Bellomo, R.V., 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological evidence of ﬁre resulting from human activities. J. Archaeol. Sci. 20, 525e553.
Bennett, J.L., 1999. Thermal alteration of buried bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 26, 1e8.
Bentsen, S.E., 2014. Using pyrotechnology: ﬁre-related features and activities with a
focus on the African Middle Stone Age. J. Archaeol. Res. 22, 141e175.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., Horwitz, L.K., Brink, J., Holt, S., Bamford, M., Chazan, M., 2012.
Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape province, South Africa. PNAS 109, 7593e7594.
Boardman, S., Jones, G., 1990. Experiments on the effects of charring on cereal plant
components. J. Archaeol. Sci. 17, 1e11.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., Huisman, H.D.J., van Os, B., 2012. Fuel, Fire and Heat: an
experimental approach to highlight the potential of studying ash and char remains from archaeological contexts. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 836e847.
ve
^que, F., Burens, A., Carozza, L., 2015.
Brodard, A., Lacanette-Puyo, D., Guibert, P., Le
A new process of reconstructing archaeological ﬁres from their impact on
sediment: a coupled experimental and numerical approach based on the case
study of hearths from the cave of Les Fraux (Dordogne, France). Archaeol.
Anthropol. Sci. 1e15.
Brown, K.S., Marean, C.W., Herries, A.I., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Braun, D., Roberts, D.L.,
Meyer, M.C., Bernatchez, J., 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of early modern
humans. Science 325, 859e862.
Buenger, B.A., 2003. The Impact of Wildland and Prescribed Fire on Archaeological
Resources. University of Kansas.
Campbell, G.S., Jungbauer Jr., J.D., Bristow, K.L., Hungerford, R.D., 1995. Soil temperature and water content beneath a surface ﬁre. Soil Sci. 159, 363e374.
Canti, M., Linford, N., 2000. The effects of ﬁre on archaeological soils and sediments:
temperature and colour relationships. Proc. Prehist. Soc. Prehist. Soc. 385e396.
Carmody, R.N., Wrangham, R.W., 2009. The energetic signiﬁcance of cooking.
J. Hum. Evol. 57, 379e391.
Cornell, R.M., Schwertmann, U., 2004. Introduction to the Iron Oxides, second ed.
In: The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, Occurences and Uses,
pp. 1e7
DeBano, L.F., 1989. Effects of Fire on Chaparral Soils in Arizona and California and
Postﬁre Management Implications.
DeBano, L.F., 1990. The effect of ﬁre on soil properties. In: Symposium on Management and Productivity of Westero-Montane Forest Soils, April 10e12, Boise,
ID.
Etok, S.E., Valsami-Jones, E., Wess, T.J., Hiller, J.C., Maxwell, C.A., Rogers, K.D.,
Manning, D.A., White, M.L., Lopez-Capel, E., Collins, M.J., 2007. Structural and
chemical changes of thermally treated bone apatite. J. Mater. Sci. 42,
9807e9816.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L.,
2009. Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age of
Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 1 (2),
95e122.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M.E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., Ben-Nun, A.,
Werker, E., 2004. Evidence of hominin control of ﬁre at Gesher Benot Ya'aqov,
Israel. Science 304, 725e727.
ry-Parisot, I., 2014. From Evenk campﬁres to prehistoric hearths:
Henry, A., The
charcoal analysis as a tool for identifying the use of rotten wood as fuel.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 52, 321e336.
Henry, D., 2012. The palimpsest problem, hearth pattern analysis, and Middle
Paleolithic site structure. Quat. Int. 247, 246e266.
Julig, P.J., Long, D.G.F., Schroeder, H.B., Rink, W.J., Richter, D., Schwarcz, H.P., 1999.

Geoarchaeology and new research at Jerf al-Ajla Cave, Syria. Geoarchaeol. An
Int. J. 14, 821e848.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A.,
Gopher, A., Stiner, M.C., 2007. Evidence for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the
Lower Paleolithic: site-formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Hum. Evol.
53, 197e212.
Lin, S., Rezek, Z., Dibble, H.L., 2016. Experimental design and experimental inference
in stone artifact archaeology. In: Collard, M. (Ed.), Lithics, Evolution, Science.
Amerind Foundation (in press).
Lin, S.C., 2014. Experimentation and Scientiﬁc Inference Building in the Study of
Hominin Behavior through Stone Artifact Archaeology. University of Pennsylvania (Unpublished).
Linford, N., Platzman, E., 2004. Estimating the approximate ﬁring temperature of
burnt archaeological sediments through an unmixing algorithm applied to
hysteresis data. Phys. Earth Planet. Interiors 147, 197e207.
ndez, C.M., Cabanes, D., Machado, J., Sistiaga, A., Pe
rez, L., Galva
n, B.,
Mallol, C., Herna
2013a. Human actions performed on simple combustion structures: an experimental approach to the study of Middle Palaeolithic ﬁre. Quat. Int. 315, 3e15.
ndez, C.M., Cabanes, D., Sistiaga, A., Machado, J., Rodríguez, T.,
Mallol, C., Herna
rez, L., Galv
Pe
an, B., 2013b. The black layer of Middle Palaeolithic combustion
structures. Interpretation and archaeostratigraphic implications. J. Archaeol. Sci.
40, 2515e2537.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F.W., Wood, B.M., Porter, C.C., 2007. Earth, wind, and ﬁre:
ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 2035e2052.
March, R.J., Lucquin, A., Joly, D., Ferreri, J.C., Muhieddine, M., 2014. Processes of
formation and alteration of archaeological ﬁre structures: complexity viewed in
the light of experimental approaches. J. Archaeol. Method Theory 21, 1e45.
Mentzer, S., 2014. Microarchaeological approaches to the identiﬁcation and interpretation of combustion features in prehistoric archaeological sites. J. Archaeol.
Method Theory 21, 616e668.
Mentzer, S.M., 2009. Bone as a fuel source: the effects of initial fragment size disry-Parisot, I., S.C, Henry, A. (Eds.), Gestion des Combustibles
tribution, in. In: The
au Paleolithique et au Mesolithique: Nouveaux Outiles, Nouvelles Interpretations, UISPP Proceedings of the XV World Congress Oxford: Archaeopress (BAR International Series 1914). Lisbon, pp. 53e64.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
ry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Costamagno, S.
modiﬁes combustion features. In: The
(Eds.), The Raphonomy of Burned Organix Residues and Combustion Features in
Archaeological Contexts, Palethnologie, Proceedings of the Round Table, Valbonne, May 27e29, pp. 25e37.
Pasto, I., Allue, E., Vallverdu, J., 2000. Mousterian Hearths at Abric Romani, Catalonia
(Spain). In: Neanderthals on the Edge Oxford. Oxbow Books, pp. 59e67.
Preece, R., Gowlett, J., Parﬁtt, S., Bridgland, D., Lewis, S., 2006. Humans in the
Hoxnian: habitat, context and ﬁre use at Beeches Pit, West Stow, Suffolk, UK.
J. Quat. Sci. 21, 485e496.
Richter, D., Alperson-Aﬁl, N., Goren-Inbar, N., 2011. Employing TL methods for the
veriﬁcation of macroscopically determined heat alteration of ﬂint artefacts from
palaeolithic contexts. Archaeometry 53, 842e857.
Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of ﬁre in
Europe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 5209e5214.
Rottl€
ander, R.C., 1983. Einführung in die naturwissenschaftlichen Methoden in der
Arch€
aologie. Verlag Archaeologica Venatoria, Institut für Vorgeschic der Universit€
at Tübingen.
Ruan, H.D., Frost, R.L., Kloprogge, J.T., Duong, L., 2002. Infrared spectroscopy of
goethite dehydroxylation: III. FT-IR microscopy of in situ study of the thermal
transformation of goethite to hematite. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol.
Spectrosc. 58, 967e981.
res lithiques: Que se passe-tSchmidt, P., 2013a. Le traitement thermique des matie
il lors de la chauffe?. In: BAR International Series 2470.
Schmidt, P., 2013b. What causes failure (overheating) during lithic heat treatment?
Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 1e6.
Schwertmann, U., 1993. Relations between Iron Oxides, Soil Color, and Soil Formation, 31 ed, pp. 51e69.
, P., Perdaen, Y., 2006. The ‘invisible’ hearths: a contribution to
Sergant, J., Crombe
the discernment of Mesolithic non-structured surface hearths. J. Archaeol. Sci.
33, 999e1007.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Lemorini, C., Gopher, A., Barkai, R., 2014.
Evidence for the repeated use of a central hearth at Middle Pleistocene (300 ky
ago) Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Archaeol. Sci. 44, 12e21.
Sievers, C., Wadley, L., 2008. Going underground: experimental carbonization of
fruiting structures under hearths. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35, 2909e2917.
Stahlschmidt, M.C., Miller, C.E., Ligouis, B., Hambach, U., Goldberg, P., Berna, F.,
Richter, D., Urban, B., Serangeli, J., Conard, N.J., 2015. On the evidence for human
€ ningen. J. Hum. Evol.
use and control of ﬁre at Scho
Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S.L., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1995. Differential burning, recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 22,
223e237.
ry-Parisot, I., 2002. Fuel management (bone and wood) during the lower
The
Aurignacian in the Pataud rock shelter (Lower Palaeolithic, Les Eyzies de Tayac,
Dordogne, France). Contribution of experimentation. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29,
1415e1421.
ry-Parisot, I., Henry, A., 2012. Seasoned or green? Radial cracks analysis as a
The
method for identifying the use of green wood as fuel in archaeological charcoal.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 381e388.

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 67 (2016) 64e79
ry, I., Gril, J., Vernet, J.L., Meignen, L., Maury, J., 1996. Coal used for fuel at two
The
prehistoric sites in Southern France: Les Canalettes (Mousterian) and Les
Usclades (Mesolithic). J. Archaeol. Sci. 23, 509e512.
Toffolo, M.B., Boaretto, E., 2014. Nucleation of aragonite upon carbonation of calcium oxide and calcium hydroxide at ambient temperatures and pressures: a
new indicator of ﬁre-related human activities. J. Archaeol. Sci. 49, 237e248.

, A., Bartrolí, R., Campeny, G., Carrancho, A.,
Vallverdú, J., Alonso, S., Bargallo

 sito, I., Fontanals, M., Gabucio, J., Go
mez, B., Prats, J.M., San
~ udo, P., Sole
, A.,
Expo
Vilalta, J., Carbonell, E., 2012. Combustion structures of archaeological level O
and mousterian activity areas with use of ﬁre at the Abric Romaní rockshelter
(NE Iberian Peninsula). Quat. Int. 247, 313e324.
, I., 2001. The deﬁnition of spatial units in Middle Palaeolithic
Vaquero, M., Pasto
sites: the hearth-related assemblages. J. Archaeol. Sci. 28, 1209e1220.
Wadley, L., 2009. Post-depositional heating may cause over-representation of redcoloured ochre in stone age sites. South Afr. Archaeol. Bull. 64, 166e171.

79

Wadley, L., 2012. Some combustion features at Sibudu, South Africa, between
65,000 and 58,000 years ago. Quat. Int. 247, 341e349.
Weiner, S., 2010. Microarchaeology beyond the Visible Archaeological Record
(Cambridge, Cambridge).
Weiner, S., Brumfeld, V., Marder, O., Barzilai, O., 2015. Heating of ﬂint debitage from
Upper Palaeolithic contexts at Manot Cave, Israel: changes in atomic organization due to heating using infrared spectroscopy. J. Archaeol. Sci. 54, 45e53.
Werts, S.P., Jahren, A.H., 2007. Estimation of temperatures beneath archaeological
campﬁres using carbon stable isotope composition of soil organic matter.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 850e857.
Wrangham, R.W., Jones, J.H., Laden, G., Pilbeam, D., Conklin-Brittain, N., 1999. The
raw and the stolen. Curr. Anthropol. 40, 567e594.
Yravedra, J., Uzquiano, P., 2013. Burnt bone assemblages from El Esquilleu cave
(Cantabria, Northern Spain): deliberate use for fuel or systematic disposal of
organic waste? Quat. Sci. Rev. 68, 175e190.

