Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

An experimental micromorphological investigation of bedding construction in the
Middle Stone Age of Sibudu, South Africa
Christopher E. Miller a, *, Christine Sievers b
a
b

Institute for Archaeological Sciences, University of Tübingen, Ruemelinstr. 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
School of Geography, Archaeology and Environmental Studies, University of the Witwatersrand, PO Wits 2050, South Africa

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 11 July 2011
Received in revised form
5 February 2012
Accepted 8 February 2012

We conducted experiments to compare the micromorphological signatures of modern burnt sedge and
grass bedding to laminated layers of carbonized material and phytoliths in Middle Stone Age deposits at
the shelter, Sibudu. The experiments were designed to clarify the formation processes associated with
the laminated layers and to investigate whether these previously identiﬁed layers of bedding were
deliberately burned or not. The results indicate that the laminated layers were most likely produced by
human activity related to the construction, maintenance and burning of bedding. Furthermore, our
experiments demonstrate that large volumes of vegetal material could have produced the relatively thin,
archaeological deposits of burnt bedding.
Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Sibudu
Middle Stone Age
Bedding
Experiments
Micromorphology

1. Introduction

1.1. The site of Sibudu

Multiple lines of evidence have suggested that the construction, maintenance, and deliberate burning of bedding was a major
activity carried out during the Middle Stone Age (MSA) occupation of Sibudu and that bedding constitutes a signiﬁcant component of the sedimentary units identiﬁed at the shelter (Goldberg
et al., 2009; Sievers, 2006; Sievers and Wadley, 2008; Wadley
et al., 2011). This paper addresses three questions relating to
the burnt bedding hypothesis: could the repeated placement of
sedges or grasses, their use as bedding, and their subsequent
burning create the laminated ﬁbrous charcoal and phytolith layers
seen in thin sections of the archaeological deposits? Could the
micromorphological signature of the archaeological bedding
indicate whether it was ignited directly, or was it burnt as a result
of later construction of overlying hearths? Do different types of
plant bedding produce different micromorphological signatures?
In order to address these questions, and to calibrate our micromorphological interpretations, we conducted a series of experiments involving the construction and burning of bedding.
The results and observations of these experiments are reported
here.

Since 1998, Lyn Wadley of the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, has headed a multidisciplinary research
program at Sibudu, a rock shelter 15 km inland from the Indian
Ocean, in KwaZulu-Natal province on the east coast of South
Africa (Fig. 1). Intense pulses of occupation during the MSA
between approximately 77 ka and 38 ka are represented by
excellent preservation of organic remains, a wealth of lithic
artifacts, the earliest record of bone arrow heads and one of the
earliest records of shell beads in Africa (Backwell et al., 2008;
d’Errico et al., 2008; Jacobs et al., 2008a,b; Wadley and
Whitelaw, 2006; Wadley et al., 2009). Enhanced working
memory and complex cognition are indicated by the evidence of
the hafting of stone tools using ochre and other materials, and
the use of bow and arrow technology, snares and traps (Wadley
and Mohapi, 2008; Wadley et al., 2009; Lombard and
Phillipson, 2010; Wadley, 2010).
The nearly 3 m deep sequence at Sibudu has been stratigraphically divided into around 60 distinct units consisting of
anthropogenic components derived from various combustion
activities (Goldberg et al., 2009; Schiegl and Conard, 2006;
Schiegl et al., 2004). The approximately 58 ka deposits are largely
composed of distinct lenses, beds and laminations, whereas the
underlying deposits (62e65 ka; 72 ka) appear more homogenous
yet contain numerous, discrete lenses of charcoal and ash.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ49 (0) 7071 29 76511; fax: þ49 (0) 7071 29 5717.
E-mail address: christopher.miller@uni-tuebingen.de (C.E. Miller).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2012.02.007

3040

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

Fig. 1. Map showing geographical situation of Sibudu.

Micromorphological analysis has indicated that people were the
main depositional agent at the site and that the lenses and laminations represent distinct anthropogenic deposits formed by the
construction of hearths, the sweeping and dumping of ashes from
hearths, the trampling of combusted material, and the construction
and burning of bedding (Goldberg et al., 2009; Goldberg and Berna,
2010; Wadley et al., 2011).
1.2. Bedding construction in an archaeological context
The preservation of archaeological bedding is not unknown,
particularly in South Africa. Excavators have recovered thick mats
of vegetal material that they have interpreted as the remains of
human bedding in Holocene (Binneman, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000;
Grobbelaar and Goodwin, 1952; Parkington and Poggenpoel,
1971; Van Rijssen and Avery, 1992) and Pleistocene (Opperman
and Heydenrych, 1990; Opperman, 1996; Texier et al., 2010) sites.
Beyond South Africa, indirect evidence for construction of bedding
has been implied by the high proportion of phytoliths preserved in
sites, such as Grotte XVI (Karkanas et al., 2002), Amud (Madella
et al., 2002) and Tor Faraj (Henry, 2003; Rosen, 2003), and the
identiﬁcation of possible sleeping areas between hearths at Abric
Romani (Vallverdú et al., 2010). More direct evidence for bedding in
a Mousterian context has been identiﬁed at Esquilleu Cave, where
layers of articulated phytoliths were identiﬁed by micromorphological analysis (Cabanes et al., 2010). Discrete areas with bedding
remains were found on the constructed ﬂoor of a grass hut at the
water-logged site of Ohalo II, dated to 23 ka (Nadel et al., 2004). The
oldest archaeological evidence for bedding besides Sibudu (Wadley
et al., 2011) is also from South Africa, from Strathalan Cave B,
a shelter in the Eastern Cape Province (Opperman, 1996), where
patches of packed grass are associated with a hearth that has been
dated to 29 ka ago.

1.3. Evidence for bedding at Sibudu
The presence of bedding at Sibudu was ﬁrst suggested by Sievers
(2006) and Sievers and Wadley (2008), based on the high frequency
of sedge nutlets (one-seeded fruits, about 1e3 mm in length) found
at the site. The authors suggested that the entry of the nutlets to the
site was through the collection of sedge culms (Sievers, 2006, 2011),
which were most likely brought to the site to construct a ﬂoor
preparation for sleeping, resting or working.
Micromorphological studies (Goldberg et al., 2009; Goldberg
and Berna, 2010) supported the archaeobotanical interpretation,
suggested by nutlet presence, of informally constructed bedding at
the site. The micromorphological analysis applied the concept of
microfacies (Flügel, 2004) to identify units whose formation was
linked to different human activities. Goldberg et al. (2009) identiﬁed the burnt bedding microfacies association by the repeated
vertical occurrence of three distinct microfacies: a lower microfacies unit consisting of laminated ﬁbrous charcoal, derived from
herbaceous material; a middle microfacies unit consisting of
laminated ﬁbrous charcoal and laminated phytoliths; and a ﬁnal
capping microfacies unit consisting solely of laminated phytoliths
(Fig. 2). These layers are usually a centimeter thick or less; however,
complexes of these microfacies associations can form layers that
are up to several centimeters thick. Although most appear to form
discontinuous lenses, some of the more extensive layers are laterally traceable across at least a meter or more of the site. The
gradational contacts between the three distinct microfacies units
suggested that the laminated charcoal and the laminated phytoliths
had a similar origin and were deposited simultaneously. However,
the upper portion of the unit had undergone post-depositional
alteration. Goldberg et al. (2009) suggested that the gradation
from laminated ﬁbrous charcoal at the base to laminated phytoliths
at the top of the layers was the result of in situ burning.

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

3041

Sievers and Wadley (2008) also noted that the evidence for bedding
at the site was carbonized, and suggested that the carbonization of
the sedge nutlets was serendipitous below subsequently constructed, yet unrelated hearths. Other examples of inadvertent heat
treatment, as well as deliberate burning at Sibudu have been noted:
Wadley (2009) cited post-depositional heating of ochre, possibly
resulting in the over-representation of red ochre in MSA sites. Clark
and Ligouis (2010) refer to incidental burning in their analysis of
the taphonomy of bone at Sibudu and mention intentional burning
of bone, as previously proposed by Cain (2006), as a possible site
maintenance activity.
2. Methods and materials
2.1. Experimental goals
We designed the experiments to address the following
questions:
 Does the experimental placement, trampling, and subsequent burning of sedge or grass bedding, as proposed
by Goldberg et al. (2009), produce micromorphological
characteristics similar to those seen in archaeological
examples from Sibudu? Can multiple experimental phases of bedding construction and burning be detected
micromorphologically?
 Is the micromorphological signature of bedding dependent
on the type of plants used?
 Were the bedding layers at Sibudu directly ignited, or were
they carbonized by overlying hearths?

2.2. Experimental design
Fig. 2. Examples of deposits interpreted as bedding at Sibudu, in the ﬁeld, and in thin
section. A) In the ﬁeld, the deposits of Sibudu appear as laminations of black alternating with white. B) In thin section, many of the white-colored layers are composed of
laminated phytoliths, as seen here. The darker-colored layers are composed of laminated, ﬁbrous charcoal, likely derived from monocotyledonous plants, such as sedges
or grasses.

The general model of formation proposed by Goldberg et al.
(2009) was that during the MSA the occupants of Sibudu
collected sedges from the adjacent uThongathi River and placed
them on the surface of the rock shelter ﬂoor to prepare an area for
sitting, resting or working. The constant trampling and compaction
of the vegetal material created the laminated microstructure seen
in thin section. The presence of stringers of crushed bone (Miller
et al., 2009) and chipped stone within the laminated ﬁbrous charcoal suggested that in some instances, sedges were repeatedly
brought to the site and laid down to refresh the bedding surface. At
some point the shelter occupants ignited the bedding, possibly as
a form of site maintenance to remove pests (Goldberg et al., 2009).

We conducted seven ﬁre experiments to address these questions (Table 1). Fires 1, 6 and 7 were designed to address the issue of
direct versus indirect burning of the bedding. Fires 2e5 were
designed to test the model for the formation of burnt bedding
proposed by Goldberg et al. (2009), and to determine if different
types of plants would produce different micromorphological
signatures that could be recognized in archaeological samples.
2.2.1. Fire 1
The aim of Fire 1 was to investigate whether the carbonization
of buried bedding material by an overlying ﬁre produced the
micromorphological signature of the archaeological bedding layers.
Previous burning experiments showed that seeds, buried up to
10 cm deep, were affected by the heat of a ﬁre lit directly above
them (Sievers and Wadley, 2008). At 5 cm below the center of the
hearth, seeds of various sizes and testa hardness, with or without
fruit adhering, and of varying oil and moisture content, became
carbonized (black throughout). At 10 cm some seeds became black,
whereas others were less affected and were altered to a dark

Table 1
Materials, methods and aims of the experimental ﬁres.
Fire

Plant type

Name

Heat treatment

Replication aim

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Sedge
Sedge
Sedge
Grass
Grass
Sedge
Sedge

Cyperus involucratus
Cyperus involucratus
Schoenoplectus litoralis
Panicum deustum
Setaria plicatilis
Cyperus involucratus
Cyperus involucratus

Single wood ﬁre above buried sedge culms
5 ﬁres, one above the other
3 ﬁres, one above the other
3 ﬁres, one above the other
3 ﬁres, one above the other
Single ﬁre
Single ﬁre

Accidental carbonization of buried bedding
Signature of repeatedly burned sedge bedding
Signature of repeatedly burned sedge bedding
Signature of repeatedly burned grass bedding
Signature of repeatedly burned grass bedding
To test the possibility of accidental ﬁre
To test the possibility of accidental ﬁre

3042

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

brown. These results indicated that it is possible that the sedge
nutlets and therefore sedge bedding layers at Sibudu, once buried,
could have been later carbonized by ﬁres made above them some
time after their entry into the deposits. The presence of numerous
hearths and the overwhelmingly ashy deposits at Sibudu (Schiegl
et al., 2004, Schiegl and Conard, 2006) support this possible
scenario.
For Fire 1, Cyperus involucratus Rottb. culms, including attached
inﬂorescences, were cut into 30 cm lengths and laid down and
compacted in a hole of the same lateral dimensions and approximately 8 cm deep. The culms were then covered by 5 cm of lightly
compacted ﬁne sediment recovered from Sibudu 1 mm screening.
Seven pieces (3 kg total mass) of Casuarina equisetifolia L., a ﬁrewood that produces relatively hot, long-lasting coals, were stacked
directly above the buried sedges and ignited using commercially
available ﬁre-starter to produce a ﬁre of 30 cm diameter. After
30 min the wood had burned down and six more pieces of wood
(also 3 kg) were added. Temperatures were recorded with a MajorTech digital thermometer (MT 632) and a K-type thermocouple
with a 50 cm probe positioned as close as possible to the base of the
buried sedges without disturbing them (the thermaprobe could not
be inserted when the sedges were laid down, because of possible
damage during compaction of the sedges). Recordings were noted
every 15 min for the ﬁrst three and a half hours, at 30 min intervals
for the next three hours, and at hourly intervals for the rest of a 24 h
period, apart from four hours in the early hours of the morning. The
measurement intervals were determined by the rate and degree
of observed temperature change, particularly those registered by
a second probe which became available two and a half hours after
the ﬁre was started. This probe was inserted to record temperatures
in the coals at the base of Fire 1.
After Fire 1 had cooled, the area was covered for protection
from wind and rain, left undisturbed for one week, and then
excavated following conventional archaeological procedures.

During excavation, a 10 cm square column sample was removed
from the center of the hearth area.
2.2.2. Fires 2e5
Fires 2e5 were designed to reproduce the model of burnt
bedding formation proposed by Goldberg et al. (2009). Both
Cyperaceae (sedge) and Poaceae (grass) pollens and phytoliths have
been identiﬁed at Sibudu (Schiegl et al., 2004; Renaut and Bamford,
2006; Schiegl and Conard, 2006; Goldberg et al., 2009) and so
two sedge species, Cyperus involucratus Rottb. and Schoenoplectus
litoralis Palla and two grass species, Panicum deustum Thunb. and
Setaria plicatilis (Hochst.) Engl. were chosen for the experimental
ﬁres (Fig. 3). At the time of the experiments (February 2010) no
grass species had been identiﬁed by macrobotanical studies at
Sibudu, and Schoenoplectus cf. brachyceras had been suggested as
a possible identiﬁcation for the sedge nutlets (Sievers, 2006). This
sedge is not available for harvesting in the Durban area, but
a similar sedge S. litoralis is available and it, like Cyperus involucratus
is regularly used for the manufacture of sleeping mats (CS, pers.
observation, Van Wyk and Gericke, 2000). The grasses for the
experiment were chosen to provide variety in the possible characteristics of the bedding: Setaria plicatilis has soft leaves and
culms, whereas Panicum deustum has ﬁrm long culms and is sturdier. All four taxa were collected in the Durban area: Cyperus
involucratus from a suburban garden in Durban North (approximately 45 km from Sibudu), Panicum deustum from a roadside
bank also in Durban North, Schoenoplectus litoralis from ponds in
Umbilo-Umhlatazana River Park, and Setaria plicatilis from coastal
forest in Virginia Nature Reserve. The sedges and grasses were laid
down on newsprint, under cover, to dry naturally.
The selected grass and sedge species were also chosen because
the habitats in which they occur can be found near Sibudu, which is
situated in a forested cliff above the perennial uThongathi River,
overlooking a north-facing slope of grassland. Cyperus involucratus

Fig. 3. Sedges and grasses used in the ﬁre experiments. A) Cyperus involucratus growing in the uThongathi River below Sibudu. B) Schoenoplectus litoralis in Umbilo Ponds, Durban.
C) CS collecting Panicum deustum alongside Crusader’s Field, Durban North. D) Setaria plicatilis in Virginia Nature Reserve, Durban North.

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

occurs in moist situations, whereas Schoenoplectus litoralis grows
only in standing water. The grass, Panicum deustum, known as reed
panicum, occurs in shade, in moist situations such as river banks
and also on stony slopes (Gibbs et al., 1990; Van Oudtshoorn, 1992).
Setaria plicatilis, known as folded leaf tussock grass (although it is
only loosely caespitose/occurring in tufts), occurs in semi-shade,
along forest margins and occasionally in woodland (Gibbs et al.,
1990). Both the tussock grass and panicum occur in coastal
forests and also in savanna. Reed panicum has long stiff culms used
in the weaving of grass mats (Gibbs et al., 1990), whereas tussock
grass is a soft leafy plant, which can make up a comfortable and
springy resting area.
For Fire 2, dried Cyperus involucratus (sedge) culms, including
inﬂorescences, were cut into 30 cm sections and placed in a hole of
the same lateral dimensions and approximately 6 cm deep, layer
upon layer at 90 degrees to each other. When the layering extended
above the ground surface a 30 cm by 30 cm piece of cardboard was
placed on the pile and the sedges were compacted under repeated
rolling of a tennis court roller, which was then left to compress the
bedding for 45 min. This was done to simulate repeated human

3043

trampling and compaction of the bedding. A thermaprobe was
placed at the base of the sedges and the sedges were ignited using
commercially available ﬁre-starter. Temperatures were recorded
every 15 min for two and a half hours, and then the thermaprobe
was removed (to prevent damage to it during the next part of the
experiment). A second series of layers of sedges was placed on the
30 cm  30 cm designated area and compacted once the layers
threatened to topple. After 45 min under the roller, the sedges were
ignited. The thermaprobe was not re-inserted because of possible
disturbance of the sediments. The layering, compacting and
igniting process was repeated ﬁve times in total, to replicate
repeated burning of bedding. The area was then covered with ﬁne
sand and compacted for one week by the stationary weight of
the roller. This phase of compaction was conducted to simulate
compaction and settling that would have occurred over time
following burial at Sibudu. Excavation followed and a block was
removed from the center of the experimental area for micromorphological analysis (Fig. 4). For Fire 3 (Schoenoplectus litoralis e
sedge), Fire 4 (Panicum deustum e reed panicum) and Fire 5 (Setaria
plicatilis e tussock grass) the dimensions of the ﬁres were as for

Fig. 4. Fire experiment methods. A) Dried Cyperus involucratus culms. B) Cut culms in 30 cm  30 cm  8 cm hole. C) Compaction of culms with garden roller. D) Burning of culms.
E) Sediment block from center of excavated Fire 1. F) Resin-impregnated blocks from ﬁre experiments (photo. Silje Bentsen).

3044

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

Fire 2, 30 cm  30 cm, and ﬁve pieces of ﬁre-starter were used to
ignite each ﬁre, one piece in each corner and one in the center.
Three sets of layers were ignited and the material was compacted
between each ﬁre. After the ﬁnal ﬁres had cooled, they were
covered by 5 cm of sand before compaction for three days.
Circumstance of timing and the amount of available sedges and
grasses governed the slight differences in number of layering and
timing of compaction between the different ﬁres.
The blocks of intact sediment from Fires 1e5 were covered
in plaster bandages to facilitate removal and to preserve the
integrity of the samples. The samples were dried on-site overnight
at 60  C and then impregnated with polyester resin (NCS Resins,
New Germany, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa) mixed with styrene
and hardener. After the resin had set following several days of air
drying, the samples were heated at 60  C overnight to complete the
hardening. They were cut using a rock saw and the resulting blocks
were thin sectioned by Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA,
USA). Thin section descriptions were conducted on a Zeiss AxioImager petrographic microscope using plane polarized light (PPL),
cross-polarized light (XPL) and oblique incident light (OIL) and
followed the procedures described by Stoops (2003) and Courty
et al. (1989).
2.2.3. Fires 6 and 7
The aim of Fires 6 and 7 was to investigate whether the bedding
material at Sibudu could have ignited accidentally, for example,
from a coal or spark of a nearby ﬁre or if direct ignition by humans
was more likely. Culms of Cyperus involucratus were used in the
experiments. The culms used in Fire 6 had previously been harvested and had been drying for 15 months in Sibudu. The sedges
were laid horizontally and were ignited with ﬁre-starter after
matches proved unsuccessful. The ﬁre-starter was positioned at
one end of the stack of sedges to observe whether the ﬂames would
move across the mass of sedges. The methods for Fire 6 were
repeated for Fire 7 which used a large stack of sedges that had been
sundried at Ballito, a coastal town approximately 15 km directly
east of Sibudu.

3. Results
3.1. Fire 1
The maximum temperature at the base of the buried sedges in
Fire 1 was 253  C, which was reached nine and a half hours after the
ﬁre was ignited and at least 3 h after the last glimmer of light could
be seen glowing in the coals (Table 2). The temperature recorded by
the second thermaprobe, positioned in the coals at the base of the
ﬁre, also continued to rise long after the ﬂames had died down and
the embers had stopped glowing. It reached a maximum of 489  C
seven and a half hours after the ﬁre was ignited.

The fuel in Fire 1 combusted completely and the remains
of the ﬁre consisted of lenticular layers, shallower at the edges
and thicker towards the center and were composed of a white
ashy layer underlain by a pinkish layer grading into a reddish
colored layer, all above a black layer. These layers overlay the
sieved Sibudu sediments and the sedges themselves (Fig. 5).
All sedges were carbonized except for those towards the perimeter and at the base of the sedge layer, which was 4.5 cm thick
(Fig. 6).
The layer of sedges is marked by the preservation of distinct
culms, roots and leaves forming a loose structure (Fig. 5). The
sedges appear carbonized, based on their opacity in plane polarized (PPL) and cross-polarized light (XPL). The lowermost sedges,
however, do not exhibit evidence of carbonization. Furthermore,
the occurrence of interference colors in XPL in the culms indicates
that original cellulose remained. Most importantly, the characteristic phytolith layers found in bedding at Sibudu are not
evident.
3.2. Fire 2
After ignition, the Cyperus involucratus burned and then rapidly
subsided after 9 min. The embers continued smoldering and the
maximum temperature, 603  C, was recorded at the base of the
sedges 18 min after ignition of the ﬁre (Table 2). Excavation of
the experiment revealed a centimeter-thick consolidated deposit
consisting of fused, burnt culms, some black but others white,
that exhibited preserved anatomical structures of the original
plants.
The alternating direction in which the sedges were laid is
distinguishable in thin section, usually from the carbonized sedges
that were sectioned transversally. The culms were compressed
from circular to lenticular in transverse section and as a result, the
vascular bundles were packed closely together. The bracts from the
sedge inﬂorescences can also be identiﬁed in transverse section and
longitudinal sections of culms are visible. In XPL, the charcoal is
opaque and the phytoliths are isotropic, as would be expected;
however, some zones of micron-sized birefringent material, most
likely calcite, are present.
Fire 2 produced micromorphological structures and features
most similar to the archaeological examples found at Sibudu. The
layer of experimentally-produced burnt bedding consisted largely
of compacted and laminated phytoliths (approximately 60%), many
of which were still articulated and retained anatomical characteristics of the original plant. The remainder of the layer consisted of
laminated ﬁbrous charcoal, which is found in distinct zones within
the laminated phytoliths. The ﬁbrous charcoal is found throughout
the layer. The distribution of the ﬁbrous charcoal in relation to the
phytoliths does not resemble the distribution found in archaeological samples from Sibudu. Importantly, it is not possible to
distinguish individual burning events in the thin sections of Fire 2.

Table 2
Results of the experimental ﬁres. Time refers to the time from the lighting of the ﬁre until the maximum temperature recorded (at the base of the ﬁre) was reached.
Temperatures were recorded only for the ﬁrst of the series of ﬁres in each experiment because the thermometer probes were removed to prevent damage during compaction of
material in subsequent ﬁres.
Fire

Plant name

Max. temp.

Time

Comments

1

Casuarina equisetifolia
Cyperus involucratus (buried)
Cyperus involucratus
Schoenoplectus litoralis
Panicum deustum
Setaria plicatilis
Cyperus involucratus
Cyperus involucratus

489  C
253  C
603  C
554  C

7½ h
9½ h
18 min
31 min

Temp. measured at base of ﬁre.
Max. reached 2 h after temp. of ﬁre above began decreasing.
Flames lasted 9 min

157  C

30 min

>800  C

5 min

2
3
4
5
6
7

Temperatures not recorded.
Not fully dry.
Temperatures not recorded.
Thermometer and probe removed to prevent damage to them.

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

3045

Fig. 5. Results of Fire 1. A) Two thin sections (each 50 mm  75 mm) collected from Fire 1, showing the ash (A) produced from the overlying ﬁre, the sieved Sibudu sediment (S)
separating the ﬁre from the sedge bedding layer (B), with a rubeﬁed top (R). Notice that the rubeﬁcation does not extend to the bedding, but that the culms of the sedges were
carbonized. Below the bedding layer (B) is consolidated red dune sand that makes up the natural substrate. B) Calcareous ash produced in the wood ﬁre. Compare this to the burnt
bedding layers (Figs. 6 and 7), where little calcareous material was found. C) A cross-section of a carbonized Schoenoplectus litoralis culm, clearly showing vascular bundles.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

3.3. Fire 3
The Schoenoplectus culms, once lit, burned well, and puffed
and expanded. They continued smouldering as in Fire 2 and also
produced a centimeter-thick consolidated deposit that preserved
anatomical features of the original plants. A maximum temperature
of 554  C was reached after 31 min (Table 2).
In general, Fire 3 exhibited micromorphological characteristics
similar to Fire 2 and to archaeological examples of burnt bedding at
Sibudu. The bedding layer of Fire 3 consisted largely of compact
laminated phytoliths (50%) and ﬁbrous charcoal. Unlike Fire 2, the
phytoliths in Fire 3 are not as clearly deﬁned and appear relatively
amorphous in morphology, making the laminated character of the
phytoliths less distinct than in Fire 2. However, many individual
phytoliths exhibit distinct morphological characteristics that
would potentially lend themselves to identiﬁcation in thin section.
The ﬁbrous charcoal, as in Fire 2, is located in distinct zones, but its
distribution is not clearly related to individual burning events.
The zones of ﬁbrous charcoal are less well deﬁned in Fire 3 than in
Fire 2 and exhibit slightly diffuse boundaries with the surrounding
laminated phytoliths. Carbonized plant material is located at the
very base and also at the very top of the burnt bedding layer.

The relatively open structure and less obvious lamination appear
to be a result of the Panicum anatomy. The burnt culms of the
grass produced articulated phytoliths that display clear laminations
similar to Fires 2 and 3. However, the Panicum leaves created a more irregular and open structure that does not appear similarly
laminated.
Fire 5 appeared similar to Fire 4 in thin section, except that the
proportion of phytoliths was the least of all ﬁres (only 25% of the
layer). Fibrous charcoal is dominant, and some weak laminations
are present, but they are not as clear as in the sedge ﬁres (Fires 2
and 3), or as in the Panicum ﬁre (Fire 4). As in Fire 4, the leaves of the
grass in Fire 5 produced a more open and irregular structure with
a less-laminated appearance compared to the other experiments.
Individual culms from the Setaria were preserved and visible in thin
section, having not been extensively crushed and compacted as in
the other experiments.
3.5. Fires 6 and 7
Upon ignition the ﬁre did not move across the stack of sedges in
Fire 6, and it died out before fully combusting the sedges. In Fire 7,
where sundried sedges were used, the ﬂames moved rapidly across
the entire stack of sedges, fully combusting all the sedges.

3.4. Fires 4 and 5
4. Discussion
As noted for the sedges, the grasses also needed ﬁre-starter to
ignite. Residual moisture or absorption of excessive humidity are
likely explanations for the difﬁculty in ignition, Nevertheless,
compacted sections of burned material were obtained for analysis.
The grass ﬁres produced results that are micromorphologically
distinct from the sedge ﬁres (Fires 2 and 3) (Fig. 7). The experiment
with Panicum (Fire 4) contains a proportion of phytoliths to ﬁbrous
charcoal that is similar to the proportion found in Fires 2 and 3
(50e60%); however, the phytoliths and ﬁbrous charcoal are not
as clearly laminated here as in Fires 2 and 3. Furthermore, the
structure of the layer is less compact than in the sedge ﬁres.

The main objective of the experiments was to determine if
modern compacted and burnt sedges and grasses would produce
a micromorphological signature similar to features identiﬁed at
Sibudu and interpreted as burnt bedding (Goldberg et al., 2009). In
particular, we were interested in investigating whether different
types of plants produced different signatures, and if multiple
episodes of bedding construction and burning could be detected
micromorphologically. We were also interested in investigating
whether we could distinguish between incidental carbonization
and direct burning of plant bedding.

Fig. 6. Sedge ﬁres: Fire 2 (A, B, C) and Fire 3 (D, E, F). A) Thin section (50 mm  75 mm) collected from Fire 2. The reddish material is the Berea red soil which provided the substrate
for this experiment. Notice the clear laminated structure of the experimental burnt bedding layer. While all experimental ﬁres produced a laminated microstructure, Fire 2 exhibited
the clearest laminations of all experiments. B) Carbonized sedge culm. C) articulated phytoliths (indicated with arrow). Similar carbonized culms and phytoliths in a laminated
microstructure are found in the archaeological deposits of Sibudu. D) In this section (50 mm  75 mm) collected from Fire 3, the over- and underlying material is sand from Ballito,
South Africa, which was the substrate for this and Fires 4, 5 and 6. Notice the clear laminations present in this experimental burnt bedding layer. E) Example of laminated phytoliths
and carbonized culms. F) A closer view of laminated carbonized culms (at base) overlain by laminated phytoliths. The phytolith-rich layers in this experiment (Fire 3) were not
a clearly deﬁned as in Fire 1. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

3047

Fig. 7. Grass ﬁres: Fire 4 (A, B, C) and Fire 5 (D, E, F). A) Thin section (50 mm  75 mm) of Fire 4. Laminations are visible, but not as clearly as in the sedge ﬁre experiments (Fires 2
and 3). B) While phytoliths and carbonized culms and leaves are clearly visible microscopically, they appear closely together, and not clearly separated into distinct zones as seen in
the sedge ﬁres and in archaeological examples. C) Laminated phytoliths and carbonized culms and leaves. D) Thin section (50 mm  75 mm) of Fire 5. This ﬁre experiment produced
results that were least similar to the archaeological examples of burnt bedding. Laminations are not clearly visible, as in the sedge ﬁres (1 and 2). E) Some grass culms were still
clearly preserved, as seen here. F) Some laminations are visible microscopically, but no clear layers of laminated phytoliths were apparent.

3048

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

Fig. 8. Archaeological and experimental examples of burnt bedding. A) Archaeological example of burnt bedding from Sibudu, from w59 ka layers (Brown under YA2(i)). Notice the
distinct zones of laminated carbonized material separated by thin, light colored layers of phytoliths. B) Experimental example of laminated phytoliths and carbonized culms, Fire 2.
Notice the similarity in appearance of the laminations compared to the archaeological example. C) Archaeological example of a laminated phytolith layer, Sibudu (OMOD). The
different articulated phytoliths are clearly visible. D) Experimental example of laminated phytolith layer from Fire 2. While all experimental ﬁres produced phytoliths to some
extent, only the sedge ﬁres produced distinct laminated layers of phytoliths. E) Vascular bundles preserved in archaeological sediments, Sibudu(OMOD). F) Experimental example
of preserved vascular bundles. The arrangement of such bundles in cross-section of a culm may allow for the identiﬁcation of different types of plants used for bedding. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

All four experiments (Fires 2e5) produced laminated ﬁbrous
charcoal and phytoliths that generally resembled the micromorphological characteristics observed in the Sibudu sediments (Fig. 8).
Of the four experiments, the sedge ﬁres, and in particular the Cyperus
experiment (Fire 2), produced results most similar to the archaeological examples of burnt bedding. Most of the combustion remains
of Fire 2 consisted of phytoliths that were predominantly articulated
and clearly deﬁned. Although phytoliths were present in the other
sedge ﬁre (Fire 3) and also in the grass ﬁres, the clear articulation and
laminations were not as well deﬁned. In general, the results of these

ﬁres indicated that the model of formation for the types of layers as
proposed by Goldberg et al. (2009) is plausible. Phytolith studies
have the potential to provide detail on the composition of the
bedding, and detailed phytolith studies at Sibudu are on-going.
Pollen is not well preserved at Sibudu, but both grass and sedge
pollens have been identiﬁed in the w58 ka layers (Renaut and
Bamford, 2006). These pollens are anemophilous, thus their presence is not necessarily connected to the bedding in the shelter.
Some micromorphological aspects of the experimental ﬁres are
different from those of the archaeological examples. All of the burnt

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

bedding layers at Sibudu are deﬁned by a basal unit of laminated
ﬁbrous charcoal that grades into an overlying layer of laminated
phytoliths. The goal of conducting multiple ﬁrings of the sedge and
grass experiments was to determine if multiple distinct burning
events could be detected when they occurred directly on top of one
another. Our experiments showed that this is not always the case.
Although laminated phytoliths and ﬁbrous charcoal were produced
in the experiments, the distinct gradation from the charcoal to the
phytoliths was not reproduced. For our experiments it seems that
complete ashing (producing the laminated phytoliths) or carbonization (producing the laminated ﬁbrous charcoal) varied in the
different experiments, so that the sedges were largely burnt to
completion (ashed), but the grasses were more likely carbonized.
A possible explanation for the lack of a clear vertical variation in
proportions of charcoal and phytoliths is that our experimental
beds were either too thin or not sufﬁciently compact. Particularly
for the sedge experiments, enough oxygen was able to reach the
base of the bedding so that the entire mass of material was able to
burn largely to completion. If the beds were thicker, or if the beds
were more compact, oxygen would have been less able to reach the
base of the deposit, thereby promoting the carbonization rather
than the complete ashing of the basal sedges. Although there was
a lack of structuring in the ﬁbrous charcoal and phytoliths in the
experiments, we observed zones of laminated ﬁbrous charcoal,
which demonstrates that this type of charcoal can be formed
during similar burning events.
One particularly striking result observed in the experiments was
the reduction in volume of the collected and compacted plant
material after burning. A total of 30 cm of compacted Cyperus and
Schoenoplectus was used for the ﬁre experiments and both
produced layers that were on average 6 mm thick after burning and
compaction. Up to 98% of the total thickness, before compaction, of
the experimental bedding layers was lost during combustion. Most
of the archaeological phytolith layers are around 1 cm thick, and
some appear at least 3 cm thick (Goldberg et al., 2009). Our
experiments suggest that the relatively thin burnt bedding deposits
at Sibudu represent signiﬁcant volumes of plant material that were
brought to the site. Based on a 98% loss of bulk, some of the
archaeological phytolith layers may represent compressed bedding
deposits that were up to 150 cm thick, though it seems unlikely that
any individual bedding unit was this thick at any given time. Albert
et al. (2008) have also suggested that phytolith-rich layers represent
a signiﬁcant loss in volume, which can inﬂuence the taphonomic
processes of a site. Micromorphological analysis of some of the
Sibudu bedding layers has identiﬁed stringers of crushed bone and
chipped stone that deﬁned surfaces within the constructed bedding
unit (Goldberg et al., 2009), suggesting that plant material was
applied repeatedly to refresh the bedding surface. The fact that large
volumes of plants are needed to form the archaeological phytolith
layers may also explain why laminated ﬁbrous charcoal is found
below laminated phytoliths in archaeological examples, but not in
the experimental examples. While our experiments produced
layers approximately as thick as some archaeological examples, our
experimental deposits were produced by several ﬁres. It seems that
the archaeological burnt bedding layers represent thicker accumulations of plant material, possibly as thick as our entire volume of
plants for each ﬁre. In the past, this large volume was possibly burnt
at one time. Therefore, in the archaeological examples, the base of
the burnt bedding layers was probably carbonized while the upper
portion of the bedding layer was ashed, producing the laminated
phytolith layers. In our experiments, the entire bedding layer was
more or less ashed, producing laminated phytolith layers with
stringers of ﬁbrous charcoal throughout the entire deposit.
Fires 1, 6 and 7 addressed the question: was the burning of the
bedding direct or indirect? Fire 1 was conducted to explore the

3049

possibility of accidental carbonization, by a post-depositional ﬁre,
of bedding that had been buried by the accumulation of overlying
sediment; this scenario had been proposed by Sievers and Wadley
(2008). If the results of Fire 1 replicated the signatures of the Sibudu
deposits (layers of phytoliths and carbonized material) they could
indicate serendipitous carbonization. Fire 1 conﬁrmed that sedge
culms carbonize when buried below 5 cm of sediment similar to
that found at Sibudu. But, the carbonized sedges were not capped
by a layer phytoliths as seen in the Sibudu microstratigraphy. This is
not an unexpected result since the heating of plant material in
a reducing environment is unlikely to allow full combustion and
produce ash, or a layer of phytoliths.
Fires 6 and 7 addressed the burning of bedding exposed on the
ﬂoor of the shelter. In Fire 6, it was not possible to ignite the sedges
so that they combusted completely. However, in Fire 7, the sedges
ignited quickly, with temperatures nearing over 900  C, necessitating the removal of the thermaprobe. A likely explanation for the
dichotomy of the results is the tendency of dried sedges to react
to the amount of moisture in the atmosphere. This feature is
successfully exploited in the north-western parts of South Africa
where nomadic herders use sedge mats to cover the curved
wooden frames of their “matjieshuise” (Afrikaans for “houses of
mats”). During the dry summer months, sedge culms shrink and
allow a breeze to pass between them, whereas in the wet winter
months the sedges absorb moisture, expand and form a watertight
covering (Van Wyk and Gericke, 2000).
While one cannot exclude the possibility that the MSA bedding of
Sibudu was accidentally burnt, either naturally or from sparks from
a nearby ﬁreplace, there are several lines of evidence from the
archaeological samples and from the experimental results that
strongly suggest that the bedding was directly ignited. Whereas Fires
6 and 7 produced different results e one suggesting that it was
difﬁcult to ignite sedges, and one suggesting that sedges ignite and
burn easily e it is important to note that the sedges which had spent
15 months in the rock shelter were difﬁcult to light. It was only sedges
which had dried in the sun that burnt easily and rapidly. The sedges
from the shelter, while appearing relatively dry, may have held
enough moisture to prevent them from easily igniting. In this
scenario, it is possible to imagine that the MSA bedding material also
retained some level of moisture that may have made it difﬁcult to
ignite accidentally and that the occupants of the shelter would have
had to apply signiﬁcant effort to light a laterally extensive layer of
thick bedding. We suggest that the inhabitants directly ignited the
bedding, in spite of possible difﬁculty it may have involved at times.
Another indication that the bedding was directly ignited comes
from the archaeological examples of bedding. The repeated occurrence of burnt bedding throughout the sequence, particularly in the
58 ka occupations (Goldberg et al., 2009) suggests that the burning
was not accidental. Furthermore, archaeological examples of
similar types of sediment, albeit from a very different archaeological context, are quite common. In the Near East and the Mediterranean, pastoralists since the Neolithic have used caves for stabling,
where straw is laid down and where dung accumulates over time
(Brochier et al., 1992; Macphail et al., 1997). When the herd leaves
the site, the shepherd will ignite the matted dung and straw
in order to remove pests and parasites (P. Goldberg, personal
communication, S. Heydari, personal communication). The micromorphological features of burnt stabling and other pastoralist
deposits (Albert et al., 2008) are remarkably similar to the bedding
deposits from Sibudu. Considering the difﬁculty of lighting some
sedges (Fire 6), the repetition and common occurrence of burnt
bedding in the site, and the similar appearance in thin section of the
Sibudu burnt bedding with intentionally burnt stabling material at
Near Eastern and Mediterranean sites, it seems probable that the
Sibudu bedding was intentionally burned.

3050

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051

Another interesting result from the ﬁre experiments was that the
ash formed by fully combusting the sedges and grasses did not
contain typical ash rhombs (Courty et al., 1989), but rather consisted
almost exclusively of phytoliths. In this sense, phytoliths are the “ash”
that is produced when burning sedges and grasses. Goldberg et al.
(2009) had suggested that diagenetic processes were responsible
for removing calcareous ash from the phytolith layers; however, it
seems more likely, based on the results of this experiment, that calcite
was never a signiﬁcant component of the laminated phytolith layers.
The lack of calcareous ashes does not seem to be a result of taphonomic processes occurring after the experiments, since calcareous
ash was produced and preserved in the wood ﬁre from Fire 1.
5. Conclusion
Our experiments suggest that the laminated ﬁbrous charcoal and
phytolith layers at Sibudu were most likely produced by the direct
burning of compacted herbaceous plant material. The four burning
experiments conducted with two species of sedges, Schoenoplectus
and Cyperus and two species of grasses, Panicum and Setaria, all
produced laminated charcoal and phytoliths. The sedges ﬁres
produced layers of laminated phytoliths, similar to numerous layers
of laminations found in micromorphological samples from Sibudu.
This ﬁnding lends support to the idea of Sievers (2006) who suggested that sedges were the dominant taxon used for the
construction of bedding during the MSA at Sibudu. Our experiments
also demonstrated that large volumes of plant material are required
to produce the relatively thin layers of laminated ﬁbrous charcoal
and phytoliths, implying that the occupants of Sibudu invested
signiﬁcant amounts of energy to collect plants for the preparation of
their living space. The collection of sedges and the construction of
bedding, combined with evidence that the bedding was possibly
burned as part of site maintenance, indicate not only a considerable
expenditure of time and energy, but also forethought in the preparation and maintenance of domestic space. With respect to the
issue of accidental or intentional burning of the bedding, our
experiment indicated that it is unlikely that buried bedding was
signiﬁcantly carbonized by subsequent combustion activities.
These results also demonstrate the value of conducting
experiments for calibration of micromorphological interpretations. Although many of the previous interpretations of the phytolith layers were supported by the result presented here, the
experiments also provided some unexpected results: ﬁrst, the
large volume of dried plant material required to produce a layer of
“burnt bedding” and, secondly, the lack of visible individual
burning events. Through experiments and studies of individual
microcontexts, geoarchaeological and archaeobotanical research
can be combined to gain a more holistic picture of human activities in the past.
Acknowledgments
Our thanks go especially to Lyn Wadley for support and access to
the Sibudu material. Thanks also to Mkipheni Ngwenya of the Natal
Herbarium, Durban, for the identiﬁcation of the grasses and to Silje
Bentsen for help in the ﬁeld. Funding for CS from the National
Research Foundation (NRF) and the Palaeontological Scientiﬁc Trust
(PAST) is gratefully acknowledged. We would also like to thank Paul
Goldberg and anonymous reviewers for making suggestions and
comments on a previous draft.
References
Albert, R.M., Shahack-Gros, R., Cabanes, D., Gilboa, A., Lev-Yadun, S., Portillo, M.,
Sharon, I., Boaretto, E., Weiner, S., 2008. Phytolith-rich layers from the Late

Bronze and Iron Ages at Tel Dor (Israel): mode of formation and archaeological
signiﬁcance. Journal of Archaeological Science 35, 57e75.
Backwell, L., d’Errico, F., Wadley, L., 2008. Middle Stone Age bone tools from the
Howiesons Poort layers, Sibudu Cave, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological
Science 35, 1566e1580.
Binneman, J., 1997. Results from a test excavation at The Havens Cave, Cambria
Valley, South-Eastern Cape. Southern African Field Archaeology 6, 93e105.
Binneman, J., 1998. Results from a test excavation at Kleinpoort Shelter in the
Baviaanskloof, Eastern Cape Province. Southern African Field Archaeology 7,
90e97.
Binneman, J., 1999. Results from a test excavation at Groot Kommandokloof Shelter
in the Baviaanskloof/Kouga Region Eastern Cape Province. Southern African
Field Archaeology 8, 100e107.
Binneman, J., 2000. Results from two test excavations in the Baviaanskloof
Mountains, Eastern Cape Province. Southern African Field Archaeology 9, 83e96.
Brochier, J.E., Villa, P., Giacomarra, M., 1992. Shepherds and sediments:
geo-ethnoarchaeology of pastoral sites. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
11, 47e102.
Cabanes, D., Mallol, C., Expósito, I., Baena, J., 2010. Phytolith evidence for hearths
and beds in the Late Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu Cave (Cantabria,
Spain). Journal of Archaeological Science 37. 2947e29.
Cain, C.R., 2006. Human activity suggested by the taphonomy of 60 ka and 50 ka
faunal remains from Sibudu Cave. Southern African Humanities 18 (1),
241e260.
Clark, J.L., Ligouis, B., 2010. Burned bone in the Howieson’s Poort and postHowieson’s Poort Middle Stone Age deposits at Sibudu: behavioral and taphonomic implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 37, 2650e2661.
Courty, M.-A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R., 1989. Soils and Micromorphology in
Archaeology. Cambridge University, Cambridge.
d’Errico, F., Vanhaeren, M., Wadley, L., 2008. Possible shell beads from the Middle
Stone Age layers of Sibudu Cave, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science
35, 2675e2685.
Flügel, E., 2004. Microfacies of Carbonate Rocks: Analysis, Interpretation and
Application. Springer, Berlin.
Gibbs Russel, G.E., Watson, L., Koekemoer, M., Smook, L., Barker, N.P.,
Anderson, H.M., Dallwitz, M.J., 1990. Grasses of southern Africa. Memoirs of
the Botanical Survey of South Africa 58, 1e438.
Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Micromorphology and context. Quaternary International 214, 56e62.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L.,
2009. Bedding, hearths and site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age of Sibudu
Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological and Anthropological Science 1, 95e122.
Grobbelaar, C.S., Goodwin, A.J.H., 1952. Report on the skeletons and implements in
association with them from a cave near Bredasdorp, Cape Province. South
African Archaeological Bulletin 7, 95e101.
Henry, D.O., 2003. Behavioral organization at Tor Faraj. In: Henry, D.O. (Ed.),
Neanderthals in the Levant, Beavioral Organization and The Beginnings of
Human Modernity. Continuum, London, pp. 237e269.
Jacobs, Z., Roberts, R.G., Galbraith, R.F., Deacon, H.J., Grün, R., Mackay, A., Mitchell, P.J.,
Vogelsang, R., Wadley, L., 2008a. Ages for the Middle Stone Age of Southern
Africa: implications for human behaviour and dispersal. Science 322, 733e735.
Jacobs, Z., Wintle, A.G., Duller, G.A.T., Roberts, R.G., Wadley, L., 2008b. New ages for
the post-Howiesons Poort, late and ﬁnal Middle Stone Age at Sibudu Cave,
South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 35, 1790e1807.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.-P., Simek, J.F., Albert, R.M., Weiner, S, 2002. Ash, bones and
guano: a study of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of Grotte XVI,
Dordogne, France. Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 721e732.
Lombard, M., Phillipson, L., 2010. Implications of bow and stone-tipped arrow use
64,000 years ago in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Antiquity 84, 1e14.
Macphail, R.I., Courty, M.A., Wattez, J., Hather, J., 1997. The soil micromorphological
evidence of domestic occupation and stabling activities. In: Maggi, R. (Ed.),
Arene Candide: A Functional and Environmental Assessment of the Holocene
Sequences Excavated by L. Bernabo’ Brea (1940e1950). Istituto Italiano di
Paleontologia Umana, Rome, pp. 53e88.
Madella, M., Jones, M.K., Goldberg, P., Goren, Y., Hovers, E., 2002. The exploitation of
plant resources by Neanderthals in Amud Cave (Israel): the evidence from
phytolith studies. Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 703e719.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N.J., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2009. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
modiﬁed combustion features. In: Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Costamagno, S.
(Eds.), The Taphonomy of Burned Organic Residues and Combustion Features in
Archaeological Contexts. Proceedings of the round table, Valbonne, May 27e29,
2008, vol. 2, pp. 25e37. P@lethnologie.
Nadel, D., Weiss, E., Simchoni, O., Tstskin, A., Danin, A., Kislev, M., 2004. Stone Age
hut in Israel yields world’s oldest evidence of bedding. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 101, 6821e6826.
Opperman, H., 1996. Strathalan Cave B, North-eastern Cape Province, South Africa:
evidence for human behaviour 29,000e26,000 years ago. Quaternary International 33, 45e53.
Opperman, H., Heydenrych, B., 1990. A 22 000 year-old Middle Stone Age camp
site with plant food remains from the north-eastern Cape. South African
Archaeological Bulletin 45, 93e99.
Parkington, J., Poggenpoel, C., 1971. Excavations at de Hangen, 1968. South African
Archaeological Bulletin 26, 3e36.

C.E. Miller, C. Sievers / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 3039e3051
Renaut, R., Bamford, M.K., 2006. Results of preliminary palynological analysis at
Sibudu Cave. Southern African Humanities 18 (1), 235e240.
Rosen, A.M., 2003. Middle Paleolithic plant exploitation: the microbotanical evidence.
In: Henry, D.O. (Ed.), Neanderthals in The Levant, Behavioral Organization and The
Beginnings of Human Modernity. Continuum, London, pp. 2156e2171.
Schiegl, S., Conard, N.J., 2006. The Middle Stone Age sediments from Sibudu: results
from FTIR spectroscopy and microscopic analyses. Southern African Humanities
18 (1), 149e172.
Schiegl, S., Stockhammer, P., Scott [Sievers], C., Wadley, L., 2004. A mineralogical and
phytolith study of the Middle Stone Age hearths in Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100, 185e194.
Sievers, C., 2006. Seeds from the Middle Stone Age layers at Sibudu Cave. Southern
African Humanities 18 (1), 203e222.
Sievers, C., 2011. Sedges from Sibudu, South Africa: evidence for their use. In:
Fahmy, A.G., Kahlheber, S., D’Andrea, A.C. (Eds.) Windows on the African Past:
Current Approaches to African Archaeobotany. Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on African Archaeobotany, June 13e15, 2009, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt. Reports in African Archaeobotany 3, 225e241.
Sievers, C., Wadley, L., 2008. Going underground: experimental carbonization
of fruiting structures under hearths. Journal of Archaeological Science 35,
209e2917.
Stoops, G., 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith Thin
Sections. Wisconsin, Soil Science Society of America, Madison.
Texier, P.-J., Porraz, G., Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.P., Poggenpoel, C., Miller, C.,
Tribolo, C., Cartwright, C., Coudenneau, A., Klein, R., Steele, T., Verna, C., 2010.
A Howiesons Poort tradition of engraving ostrich eggshell containers dated to
60,000 years ago at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, South Africa. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 6180e6185.

3051

Vallverdú, J., Alonso, S., Bargalló, A., Batroli, R., Campeny, G., Carrancho, A.,
Expósito, I., Fontanals, M., Gabucio, J., Gómez, B., Prats, J.M., Sañudo, P., Solé, A.,
Vilalta, J., Carbonell, E., 2010. Combustion structures of archaeological level O
and Mousterian activity areas with use of ﬁre at the Abric Romaní rockshelter
(NE Iberian Peninsula). Quaternary International 247, 313e324.
Van Oudtshoorn, F., 1992. Guide to the Grasses of South Africa. Briza, Pretoria.
Van Rijssen, B., Avery, G., 1992. The Late Holocene deposits at Klein Kliphuis Shelter,
Cederberg, Western Cape Province. South African Archaeological Bulletin 47, 34e43.
Van Wyk, B.-E., Gericke, N., 2000. People’s Plants. A Guide to Useful Plants of
Southern Africa. Briza, Pretoria.
Wadley, L., 2009. Post-depositional heating may cause over-representation of
red-coloured ochre in Middle Stone Age sites. South African Archaeological
Bulletin 64, 166e171.
Wadley, L., 2010. Were snares and traps used in the Middle Stone Age and does it
matter? A review and a case study from Sibudu, South Africa. Journal of Human
Evolution 59, 179e192.
Wadley, L., Hodgskiss, T., Grant, M., 2009. Implications for complex cognition from
the hafting of tools with compound adhesives in the Middle Stone Age, South
Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 106 (24), 9590e9594.
Wadley, L., Mohapi, M., 2008. A segment is not a monolith: evidence from the
Howiesons Poort of Sibudu, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 35,
2594e2605.
Wadley, L., Sievers, C., Bamford, M., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., Miller, C., 2011. Middle
Stone Age bedding construction and settlement patterns at Sibudu, South
Africa. Science 334, 1388e1391.
Wadley, L., Whitelaw, G. (Eds.), 2006. Middle Stone Age Research at Sibudu Cave.
Southern African Humanities 18(1), pp. 1e341.

