Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Burned bone in the Howieson’s Poort and post-Howieson’s Poort Middle Stone
Age deposits at Sibudu (South Africa): behavioral and taphonomic implications
Jamie L. Clark a, b, *, Bertrand Ligouis c
a

Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, PO Box 750336, Dallas, TX 75275, USA
Institute for Human Evolution, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
c
Laboratory for Applied Organic Petrology, Institut für Ur- und Frühgeschichte und Archäologie des Mittelalters, and Zentrum für Naturwissenschaftliche Archäologie, EberhardKarls-Universität Tübingen, Rümelinstr. 23, 72072 Tübingen, Germany
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 17 January 2010
Received in revised form
31 May 2010
Accepted 1 June 2010

Despite a growing awareness of the wide range of information that can be provided by detailed analyses
of burned bone from archaeological contexts, such analyses are still relatively uncommon. This paper
focuses on the behavioral and taphonomic implications of burned bone from the Middle Stone Age (MSA)
site of Sibudu Cave (South Africa), reporting on the analysis of a large sample (>377,000 fragments) of
bone recovered from the Howieson’s Poort (HP) and post-HP MSA deposits at the site. Faunal remains
were initially sorted into burning categories based on changes in color; microscopic analyses focused on
the optical properties of the bone matrix (degree of preservation of the bone structure, reﬂectance and
ﬂuorescence) indicated that the color is a valid indicator of thermally altered bone in the Sibudu
assemblage. The association of burned bone with hearths, the intensity of burning damage, and the sheer
quantity of thermally altered bone suggests that the bone was not burned primarily as a result of natural
ﬁres. We propose that the high incidence of burned bone primarily reﬂects two types of site maintenance
activities: ﬁrst, the discarding of bone into ﬁre as a means of disposing of food waste (as also argued by
Cain [2005, Using burned animal bone to look at Middle Stone Age occupation and behavior. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 32, 873e884], for a smaller sample of material from the post-HP and late MSA deposits at the site),
and second, the incidental burning of bone on/near the surface during the periodic burning of plantbased bedding. In considering the taphonomic implications of the burned bone, we demonstrate that
calcined bone is in fact more heavily fragmented than unburnt or moderately burned bone. Furthermore,
cortical preservation was negatively correlated with the intensity of burning damage, which has
implications for the study of surface modiﬁcations. These results indicate the importance of conducting
thorough taphonomic analyses prior to making comparisons between units that show differing degrees
or intensities of burning damage.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Sibudu Cave
Taphonomy
Zooarchaeology
Burned bone
Reﬂected light microscopy
Reﬂectance
Oxide staining

1. Introduction
While analyses of faunal remains from archaeological contexts
often mention the presence of thermally modiﬁed bone in an
assemblage, it is less common for scholars to fully address the
behavioral and taphonomic implications of burned bone. The small
but growing number of studies that do incorporate detailed analyses of burned bone have demonstrated the utility of these studies
on a number of levels (see particularly Asmussen, 2009; Cain, 2005;
Dibble et al., 2009). From a behavioral perspective, the distribution
* Corresponding author at: Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, PO Box 750336, Dallas, TX 75275, USA. Tel.: þ1 517 694 0193.
E-mail addresses: jamielc@umich.edu (J.L. Clark), bertrand.ligouis@unituebingen.de (B. Ligouis).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2010.06.001

of burning damage on identiﬁable remains can provide information
on cooking practices (e.g., Speth and Clark, 2006; Speth and
Tchernov, 2001). Bone can also be burned after consumption; it
can be discarded into a ﬁre after consumption, perhaps as a means
of reducing its attractiveness to carnivores (e.g., Gifford-Gonzalez,
1989), and it can be used as fuel (e.g., Costamagno et al., 2005;
Théry-Parisot et al., 2005). Of these, the identiﬁcation of bone
fuel has been a particular focus for those interested in the behavioral implications of burned bone from Paleolithic contexts (e.g.,
Costamagno et al., 2009; Dibble et al., 2009; Mentzer, 2009; ThéryParisot, 2002). However, bone can also be burned naturally, as
a result of natural ﬁres or as a result of the proximity of discarded
bone to a hearth or other combustion activities. In determining
what burned bone indicates about human behavior, it is therefore
important to ascertain whether the bone was naturally or

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

intentionally burnt, and whether it was burned pre- or postconsumption/deposition.
A consideration of burning is also relevant when reconstructing the taphonomic history of a given assemblage. First, it has
been argued that burned bones are more fragile/brittle than
unburned bones, and it has also been proposed that the
mechanical strength of bone varies as a function of the extent to
which it is burned (e.g., Stiner, 2005; Stiner et al., 1995). Differences in the presence and/or intensity of burning across archaeological horizons may thus result in differential fragmentation,
potentially affecting the interpretation of patterning identiﬁed in
the faunal record. Burning also has a negative impact on the
preservation of bone surfacesdeven low levels of burning can
cause cracking and peeling of the cortical surface, while highly
burned/calcined bone often becomes chalky in texture, with no
preservation of the original cortical surface (Nicholson, 1993;
Schmidt and Symes, 2008). This can negatively impact the preservation of surface damage, including evidence for human processing or carnivore/rodent activity. As such, it may not be valid to
conduct comparative analyses based on the occurrence of surface
modiﬁcations if the assemblages under consideration have been
differently affected by burning.
This paper reports on the analysis a large sample (>377,000
fragments) of burned bone from the Howieson’s Poort (HP) and
post-HP MSA deposits at Sibudu Cave (KwaZulu-Natal, South
Africa), and expands upon earlier work on burned bone at the site
conducted by Cain (2005) and Hanson and Cain (2007); their work
was based on a much smaller sample of remains from the post-HP
and late MSA deposits at the site. The current study is part of larger
research efforts aimed at characterizing variability in human
behavior and in the environment between the HP and post-HP MSA
at Sibudu, and also at understanding the nature of the burning
evidenced in the Sibudu assemblage (e.g., Cain, 2005; Hanson and
Cain, 2007; Clark, 2009; Clark and Plug, 2008; Cochrane, 2008;
Goldberg et al., 2009; Lombard and Clark, 2008; Sievers and
Wadley, 2008; Wadley, 2009).
2. Materials and methods
Sibudu Cave is situated on a cliff above the Tongati River,
approximately 40 km north of Durban in KwaZulu-Natal, South
Africa. Current excavations at the site, directed by Lyn Wadley, have
been ongoing since 1998. To date, 21 sq. m of MSA deposits have
been excavated, although the deepest deposits at the site have only
been reached in a 6 sq. m trial trench. Deposits are excavated in
50 cm quadrants and screened using nested 2 mm and 1 mm
sieves.
Sibudu preserves extensive MSA deposits which span from the
pre-Still Bay (>72 ka) through the ﬁnal MSA (w37 ka), and it is one
of the few known sites to preserve deposits dating to the transition
from the HP (w65e62 ka)da phase which has received attention
for its innovative technology such as geometric backed tools and
ﬁnely made bone points (e.g., Backwell et al., 2008)dto the post-HP
MSA (weighted mean age of w58 ka), in which there is a return to
a more typical MSA pattern in which these objects are absent
(Jacobs et al., 2008a,b).
In addition to the changes in material culture evidenced
between the HP and the post-HP MSA, there are also a number of
characteristics which distinguish the archaeological deposits
themselves. The HP is comprised of thicker, monotonously colored,
sandy or silty deposits, while the post-HP MSA consists of thin,
brightly colored, ashy or silty deposits that contain palimpsests of
interﬁngering hearths and ash layers (Pickering, 2006; Wadley and
Jacobs, 2006). The post-HP MSA is also more variable in sediment
composition than is the HP. In addition, gypsum inclusions, which

2651

occur frequently in the post-HP MSA, are largely absent in the HP
(Schiegl and Conard, 2006).
Burning features are common throughout the Sibudu sequence.
Hearths are discernable as ﬂat, circular patches of ash; thus far, no
stone foundations have been located and only rarely do the features
show concave bases. The hearths are generally no more than
10e15 cm thick and are often stratiﬁed into a basal layer of reddishbrown burnt earth, a central brown-black layer that is rich in
charcoal, and an upper layer of off-white or yellow ash. These are
well preserved as separate features within the HP, where burning
features are relatively sparsely dispersed (Wadley, 2006; Wadley
and Jacobs, 2006). In contrast, the post-HP MSA shows pervasive
evidence for massive burning events; the interﬁngering nature of
the hearths in these layers makes it difﬁcult to distinguish individual burning episodes. This is further compounded by the fact
that many of these hearths show several focal points, which may
indicate repeated use (Allott, 2006).
Given these differences, it was expected that there may also be
variation in the presence and frequency of burned bone; as indicated in the introduction, these differences could be quite informative of variation in both human behavior and in the taphonomic
histories of the assemblages under consideration. Previous work by
Cain (2005) suggested that burning in the post-HP MSA may be due
primarily to the disposal of bone waste into ﬁre; given that this
practice is not a universal one, if the current study conﬁrms this
hypothesis, and if the burning in the HP appears to have the same
source, this would be a noteworthy instance of behavioral continuity between the two phases. Following Clark and Plug (2008), the
post-HP MSA has been split into two units for this analysis; the
upper-most layers are referred to as the post-HP MSA 1, while
the lower layers are referred to as the post-HP MSA 2 (Fig. 1).
2.1. Identifying burned bone at Sibudu
Experimental studies have demonstrated that thermally altered
bone displays a predictable range of surface color and texture
changes, such that the color of a bone can be used to judge the
degree of burning intensity (e.g., Bennett, 1999; Nicholson, 1993;
Shipman et al., 1984). Because the intensity of burning damage is
related to both the temperature and the duration of heating, it has
been argued that color is a poor indicator of the precise temperature
to which a bone was heated, but can provide an indication of the
range of temperatures to which the bone was heated (see Lyman,
1994 and references therein). Lightly heated bones (<400  C)
tend to be yellow to reddish-brown in color; bone exposed to
higher temperatures (w400e500  C) carbonizes and turns black,
and intensively heated bones (>600  C) eventually become
calcined and are typically blue-grey to white in color (Lyman, 1994;
Shipman et al., 1984). Given this, the HP and post-HP MSA fauna
was initially sorted into a number of burning categories based on
color.
In working with the Sibudu fauna, the ﬁrst step in the analysis
was to divide the assemblage into identiﬁable and non-identiﬁable
fractions. The non-identiﬁable sample included all material that
could not be identiﬁed to speciﬁc skeletal element or taxon;
however, this sample was sorted into several fragment categories:
skull, enamel, ribs, vertebrae, long bone shafts, and miscellaneous;
material less than and greater than 2 cm was treated separately. All
of the non-identiﬁed bone from the ﬁrst two units of the trial
trench (B5 and B6) was subjected to detailed analysis; this included
sorting the fragments into four burning categories: not burned
(NB), lightly burned (LB, <50% black/carbonized), moderately
burned (MB, >50% black/carbonized), and highly burned (HB, >50%
grey-white/calcined). For the remainder of the units under
consideration (B4, C5, and C6), the large-fraction (>2 cm) non-

2652

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

Fig. 1. Stratigraphic proﬁle drawing showing the HP and post-HP MSA deposits.

identiﬁed bone was fully analyzed; however, sorting and counting
of the less-than-2 cm non-identiﬁed bone was limited to one 50cm quadrant per unit, per layer. Because it was often difﬁcult to
ascertain whether these small fragments were lightly burned or
oxide stained (see below), the NB/LB categories were combined
after the ﬁrst season of analysis.
Identiﬁable bone was assigned to one of the seven burning
categories deﬁned by Stiner et al. (1995) (Table 1). However, in
order to make the data for the identiﬁed bones comparable to that
available for the non-identiﬁed bones, for this study, the identiﬁed
bones were assigned to the same categories utilized for the nonidentiﬁed bone: NB/LB (burning codes 0e1), MB (burning codes
2e4), and HB (burning codes 5e6).
It is important to note that the use of color categories for the
identiﬁcation of burned bone from archaeological contexts is not
necessarily straightforward, as organic and mineral staining can
mimic the color changes caused by burning (e.g., Hanson and Cain,
2007; Karkanas et al., 2007; Michel et al., 2006; Shahack-Gross
et al., 1997). For example, a blackened bone may have been carbonized by exposure to heat, but the color may also be due to staining by

manganese or iron oxides. As a result, researchers have developed
a variety of methods for ascertaining whether or not color is an
appropriate indicator of burning intensity in a particular assemblage;
these methods include chemical analyses (e.g., Shahack-Gross et al.,
1997), microscopic studies of bone histology (Hanson and Cain,
2007), and microscopic analyses focusing on the optical properties
of the bone matrix, including reﬂectance and ﬂuorescence, as well as
on the organic combustion remains (charcoal, char, partially burnt
coal) which accompany the bone fragments (Goldberg et al., 2009;
Ligouis, 2006; Schiegl et al., 2004a). Because these methods are
generally both costly and time-consuming, they are typically only
undertaken on a sample of material from a given assemblage.
Based on coloration alone, the HP and post-HP MSA fauna from
Sibudu appeared to be highly burned, with greater than 95% of the
bone in some layers showing at least some degree of burning.
However, oxide staining is also common. While this staining is often

Table 1
Burning categories utilized for the identiﬁable bone (modiﬁed from Stiner et al.,
1995).
Burning Code

Description

0
1
2
3
4
5
6

Not burned (typically cream/tan in color)
Localized burning (<50% black)
Moderate burning (>50% black)
Carbonized (100% black)
Localized calcination (<50% white)
Moderate calcination (>50% white)
Calcined (typically white or blue/grey)

Fig. 2. Moderately burned bone with oxide staining (staining was black but camera
ﬂash brought out the metallic sheen). Scale bar ¼ 1 cm.

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

distinct from burning damage (for example, some of the stains have
a metallic sheen, see Fig. 2), this was not always the case. Thus, in
order to conﬁrm that the color changes evidenced in the assemblage
actually reﬂect exposure to heat rather than mineral staining,
a sample of 11 bones from the HP and post-HP MSA was sent to the
second author at the Laboratory for Applied Organic Petrology (LAOP,
University of Tübingen) for more detailed analysis. This sample
included bones that appeared to be unburnt, lightly, moderately, and
heavily burned, those that appeared to be oxide stained, and four
bones that were representative of the coloration of a large number of
bones but for which the burning status was more ambiguous
(typically ranging from deep orange to maroon in color).
Ligouis produced highly polished sections of each bone sample
and examined these using a Leitz DMRX-MPVSP microscope
photometer (set up with oil immersion objectives) at 20 to 100
in both incident white-light and UV and violet-light illumination
(ﬂuorescence mode; excitation ﬁlter 355e425 nm) (Taylor et al.,
1998). Examples of these can be seen in Figs. 3 (macroscopic
view) and 4 (photomicrographs). Data were recorded on the color
of the bone in reﬂected light, the preservation of bone structure, the
presence of cracks and vesicles, the reﬂectance of the bone matrix
(measurement of the microreﬂectance in monochromatic light at
546 nm), the ﬂuorescence properties of the bone matrix, and the
presence of oxide staining.
Results were compared with samples from two ﬁre experiments
and from other Paleolithic contexts (including micromorphology
samples) in order to ascertain whether the bone was burned, to
provide an estimate of the temperature to which the bone had been
heated, and to judge whether or not oxides were present. (Berna
et al., in preparation; Goldberg et al., 2009; Schiegl et al., 2004a).
Table 2 (modiﬁed from Berna et al., in preparation) summarizes the
main results of the microscopic study of heated bones from
a furnace experiment; these results were utilized in determining
the burning status of the Sibudu bone samples. This study

2653

principally demonstrated that the reﬂectance of the bone matrix
increases with increasing temperature, and that the ﬂuorescence
intensity decreases with increasing reﬂectance as a result of
mineralogical transformations and the loss of organic matter
(Berna et al. in preparation). Of note is the ﬁnding that blackened
bones which were produced at temperatures around 300  C were
characterized in reﬂected light by heterogeneous colors with
reddish internal reﬂections, and showed ﬁssures, cracks and
numerous vesicles. White (calcined) bones formed at 800  C
showed few ﬁssures and cracks and were non-ﬂuorescing.
A description of each sample from Sibudu, along with the results
of Ligouis’ analysis, can be found in Table 3. A more detailed data
table, including the reﬂectance values for the samples and further
description of their characteristics, can be found in Appendix 1.
With the exception of two bones for which the burning status was
unclear, all of the bones that were visually identiﬁed as being
burned were also classiﬁed as such by Ligouis. The two ambiguous
samples (from SPCA and Chestnut) were difﬁcult to classify because
in each case, the color in reﬂected light and reﬂectance of the bone
matrix indicated burning at high temperatures, while the preservation of the bone structure and ﬂuorescence correlated more with
an unburned state (see Fig. 3, image 3; Fig. 4, images 3a and 3b).
It is interesting to note that some of the bones that were
visually classiﬁed as lightly burned because of their reddishorange coloration were identiﬁed as being burned at potentially
higher temperatures than some of the blackened or even grayishwhite bone (Fig. 3, images 2 and 4; Fig. 4, images 2a, 2b, and 4a,
4b)dthis goes against expectations and may indicate that the
duration of heating played more of a role in determining the
intensity of burning damage than the maximum temperature to
which the bone was exposed. It could also indicate that diagenetic
processes (such as recrystallisation) may have altered the original
features of the burnt bone, thus distorting the results and their
interpretation. This indicates the importance of continued

Fig. 3. Macroscopic views of the polished sections of four selected bones at 20 magniﬁcation. The mentioned burning status is that determined by the microscopic analyses. 1.
Grey Rocky II B5c, unburned bone. The bone shows a homogeneous light brown colour. The black splotches in the outer margin are due to oxide staining. The bone structure is
visible. 2. Grey Sand I C5b, burned at low temperatures (300  C). The bone shows a homogeneous dark brown colour. The bone structure is visible. 3. Chestnut B5b, unburned or
burned at high temperatures (>600  C). The bone shows heterogeneous colours ranging from dark brown to whitish light-brown. The numerous black splotches are due to oxide
staining. The bone structure is visible. 4. Pox B6a, burned at very high temperatures (>800  C). The bone is characterized by heterogeneous colours ranging from dark brown to
whitish light-brown. The bone structure is clearly visible and well preserved.

2654

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

Fig. 4. Photomicrographs in incident white light, oil immersion (left) and ﬂuorescence mode, oil immersion (right) of four selected bones (see Fig. 3 for macroscopic views of these
specimens). Grey Rocky II B5c, unburned bone: 1a. the bone matrix is characterized by a strong luminosity. It appears light-brown orangey and yellowish. 1b. note the greatly
enhanced detail, and the pale green and dark green ﬂuorescence of very low intensity. Grey Sand I C5b, burned at low temperatures (300  C). 2a. The bone matrix is dark colored (dark
grey, greyish brown, orange-brown) and shows reddish-orange internal reﬂections. Note the presence of a strong reﬂecting thin metal oxide layer on the corroded surface of the
bone. 2b. The bone matrix ﬂuoresces a weak brown color except near the surface of the bone where it ﬂuoresces bright yellow. Chestnut B5b, unburned or burned at high temperatures
(>600  C). 3a. Partial replacement of the bone matrix by metal oxides (cryptocristalline and amorphous phases, middle grey to light grey, medium to high reﬂective and anisotropic,
probably Mn oxides). The greyish-brown and dark brown areas are not affected by the metal oxide mineralization. 3b. Note the bright greenish-yellow ﬂuorescence in the bone
matrix not affected by the metal oxide mineralization and the absence of ﬂuorescence in the areas showing metal oxides. Pox B6a, burned at very high temperatures (>800  C). 4a.
The greyish-brown bone matrix shows numerous ﬁssures and the bone surface appears corroded. 4b. The bone matrix ﬂuoresces a greenish yellow color of medium intensity and
the bone structure is poorly recognizable.

experimental work. Moreover, the microscopic study demonstrated that the black splotches observed on the surface of bones
(Fig. 3, images 1e3; Fig. 4, images 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b) were result of the
precipitation of oxides and therefore cannot be attributed to
organic combustion remains (e.g. char; see Goldberg et al., 2009).
As a rule, then, it would appear that changes in color are useful for
identifying thermally altered bones in the HP and post-HP MSA
fauna from Sibudu. As such, the remainder of the analyses presented here will be based on the results of the visual classiﬁcation
of the remains.
3. Burned bone in the HP and post-HP MSA
Fig. 5 summarizes the burning data by perioddthe data presented here includes all bone sorted into burning categories, both
identiﬁed and non-identiﬁed, for a total sample of 377,508

fragments. More than half the bone in all three assemblages is at
least moderately burned (>50% carbonized), demonstrating the
remarkably high levels of burning damage in the sample. Although
burning is prevalent in all three periods, the post-HP MSA 2 shows
a signiﬁcantly larger proportion of highly burned bone than either
the HP or the post-HP MSA 1; this has potentially important
taphonomic implications, particularly as relates to variability in
fragmentation and in the preservation of surface damage; these
issues will be discussed in more detail below.
Given that the overwhelming majority of the sample is
comprised of non-identiﬁable fragments less than 2 cm in size, the
results presented in Fig. 5 are no doubt driven by the heavy burning
evidenced among this subset of the assemblage. However, the
Sibudu fauna is also unusual because the high frequencies of
burning are not limited to the small fraction non-identiﬁed bone.
As can be seen in Fig. 6, the proportion of burned bone is also high

100 Pale green, pale
yellowish-green, or pale
brown, very low intensity

100 None

0.082

0.097

0.209

0.10

0.20

0.74
0.35e1.31
Rare ﬁssures and cracks
None

0.03e0.60
Rare ﬁssures and cracks

White and
yellowish-white
800

Pale yellowish-white

Middle grey,
brownish-grey
550

Remainders of bone
structure: concentric
and ﬁbrous structures
and canals
Remainders of bone
structure: concentric
and ﬁbrous structures
and canals

None

0.05e0.46

Very heterogeneous:
mostly brown-grey,
locally light grey,
reddish-brown to dark
grey, frequently reddish
and orange internal
reﬂection
Pale brown to greyishbrown
Black
300

Remainders of bone
structure: concentric
and ﬁbrous structures
and canals

Char coat (light grey to
white) on the bone
surface and on the walls
of the vesicles

Common ﬁssures and
cracks, numerous large
and irregular vesicles

100 Mostly non-ﬂuorescing
(pale greenish, pale
yellowish-green), locally
dark brownish, very low
intensity
100 Bright yellow, yellowbrown to dark brown,
moderate to high
intensity
0.039
0.07
0.01e0.25
/
Heterogeneous: pale
Bone structure clearly
whitish-yellow, greyish, visible
light grey, pale brownishgrey, reddish-brown
Greyish-white and
yellowish-brown
Not heated

/

Minimum and
Mean Std. dev. N
maximum values

Fluorescence properties
of bone matrix (color,
intensity)
Reﬂectance %Rr of the bone matrix
(l ¼ 546 nm, oil immersion)

Fissures, cracks, pores,
vesicles (degassing
process)
Organic combustion
remains (char)
Preservation of bone
structure
Color in reﬂected
white light
Color (naked eye)
Heating
temperature  C

Table 2
Results of the microscopic study of the experimentally burned fresh bones used for the determination of the burning status of the Sibudu bones. Rr: random reﬂectance, Std. dev.: standard deviation, N: number of measurements
(modiﬁed from Berna et al., in preparation).

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

2655

among the larger non-identiﬁable fragments and the identiﬁed
bones. The fact that the identiﬁed bone is also heavily burnt is of
particular note, as many other Paleolithic assemblages showing
high frequencies of burning among the non-identiﬁable bone show
markedly lower proportions of burned bone among the identiﬁed
sampledTable 4 compares the results from Sibudu to several of
these other sites. The reasons for this discrepancy are not immediately clear, but it could be due in part to the effort taken to
identify even the small burned fragments at Sibududthese fragments may be more apt to be overlooked when there is a substantial sample of unburnt identiﬁable bones.
3.1. Identifying the timing and agent of burning
Bone can be burned by a number of processes, both intentional
(cooking, disposal of food waste, fuel) and natural/unintentional
(brush ﬁres, burned due to proximity to combustion features).
There are a number of reasons to think that the burning at Sibudu
was not primarily a result of natural (i.e., brush) ﬁres. First and
foremost is the association of burned bone with hearths. While
burning features were more common in the post-HP MSA, the HP
deposits also preserve some well-deﬁned hearths; micromorphological work by Goldberg et al. (2009) suggests the smaller number
of well-preserved burning features in the HP may be due to
extensive trampling, which resulted in mixing of the deposits. The
intensity of the burning also indicates that natural ﬁres were likely
not responsible for the burned bone; experimental work undertaken by David (1990) indicated that bones exposed to brush ﬁres
are often carbonized but rarely calcined, leading him to argue that
when bones are calcined over much of their surface area, the
presence of anthropogenic ﬁres can be “safely inferred.”
Yet, it seems undeniable that at least some of the burning was
unintentional. Given the number of well-preserved burning
features, particularly in the post-HP MSA, it seems likely that much
of the bone must have been exposed to heat from overlying hearths
or other combustion activities after deposition. Work by Bennett
(1999) and Stiner et al. (1995) has demonstrated that bone buried
in sediment underneath a hearth can be modiﬁed by exposure to
heat; however, the intensity of the burning damage can vary based
on a number of factors, including: the depth of the bone below the
ﬁre, the temperature of the ﬁre, the duration of heat exposure, and
the nature of the surrounding sediments. Stiner et al.’s (1995)
experimental work indicated that bone burned indirectly as
a result of overlying hearths may be charred but not calcined; only
those bones directly in contact with the ﬁre became calcined. The
relative frequency of calcined bone in the Sibudu deposits thus
indicates the burning cannot be solely attributed to incidental
burning from overlying hearth structures.
Cain (2005) argued that incidental burning from overlying
hearths should also cause patchy distributions of burned bone,
presumably because the burned bone would be expected to occur
in direct association with hearth features. Given that burned bones
were found throughout the layers, he thus argued that incidental
burning was likely an insufﬁcient explanation for the high
percentage of burned bone at Sibudu. And yet, studies by Schiegl
and colleagues (Schiegl and Conard, 2006; Schiegl et al., 2004b)
found that the sedimentary composition and phytolith content of
the deposits were similar between hearths/ash dumps and the
surrounding sediments, suggesting that there was more ﬁre use at
Sibudu than indicated by the preserved hearth remains indicate.
Micromorphological work by Goldberg et al. (2009) supported this
argument; they also demonstrated that some of the deposits,
particularly in the HP, had been reworked/homogenized, likely by
trampling. As such, I would argue that, contra Cain, the distribution
of the burned bones in and of itself does not serve to discount post-

2656

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

Table 3
Results from Ligouis’ study of a sample of burned bone from HP and post-HP MSA contexts.
Layer

Unit

Visual classiﬁcation

Microscopic analysis

Color (naked eye)

Burning status

Oxides

Burning Status

Oxides

Lightly burned
(<50% carbonized)
Heavily burned
(>50% calcined)
Heavily burned?
(>50% calcined)
Moderately burned
(>50% carbonized)

Yes

Yes, prob. Mn oxides

No

Unburned or burned at high
temperatures (>600  C)
Burned at high
temperatures (600  C)
Unburned or burned at high
temperatures (>600  C)
Burned, probably at very
high temperatures
(800  C)
Burned, probably at low
temperatures (w300  C)
Burned, probably at
moderate temperatures
(w300e600  C)
Burned, probably at low
temperatures (w300  C)
Probably unburned
Burned, probably at
moderate temperatures
(w300e600  C)
Burned, probably at low
temperatures (w300  C)
Burned, probably at
moderate temperatures
(w300e600  C)

SPCA

B5a

Orangey

Midnight (Hearth)

B5a/b

Greyish yellow

Chestnut

B5b

Greyish brown

Pox

B6a

Mottled black/orange/
greyish-brown

Brown Pox

B6b

Black/brown

Grey Rocky I

B5a

Black exterior/orangey
interior

Moderately burned
(>50% carbonized)
Lightly burned
(<50% carbonized)

Grey Rocky I (Hearth E)

B5a
B5c
B5d

Heavily burned
(>50% calcined)
Not burned
Lightly burned?
(<50% carbonized)

Maybe?

Grey Rocky II
Grey Sand I

Greyish white with black
and brown mottling
Yellow
Maroon exterior/orangey
interior

Grey Sand I

C5b

Black

Carbonized?

Yes

Pinkish Grey Sand

B5d

Mottled maroon/orange/
brown

Lightly burned?
(<50% carbonized)

Yes

depositional exposure to heat as one of the factors responsible for
the high frequency of burned bone represented in the Sibudu
assemblage.
In their micromorphological study, Goldberg et al. (2009)
proposed that two primary types of combustion activities are
represented at Sibudu: the construction of hearths and the burning
of bedding constructed of plant material (likely sedges; see Sievers,
2006; Sievers and Wadley, 2008). The latter possibility deserves
further discussion, as it could result in the burning of bone at or
near the surface of the site. Goldberg et al. (2009) found that the
deposits at Sibudu contained distinct “microfacies” comprised of
phytoliths in laminated layers that are associated with charred

100%

80%

60%
NB/LB
MB
HB

40%

20%

0%
HP

post-HP MSA 2

post-HP MSA 1

Fig. 5. Burning data by phase (identiﬁed and non-identiﬁed bone).

Yes
Maybe?
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes, prob. Mn oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides

None
Yes, prob. Mn oxides and Fe
oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides and Fe
oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides

Yes, prob. Mn oxides
Yes, prob. Mn oxides

ﬁbrous material, as well as layers of nothing but phytoliths (without
lamination); they proposed that these features represent the
repetitive and intentional burning of bedding, perhaps as a form of
site maintenance. If bedding was being burned on a regular basis,
faunal remains (particularly those at/near the surface) could have
been repeatedly exposed heat. Experimental work will be necessary to ascertain the intensity of burning damage that could be
expected from this type of activity (i.e., whether it could account for
the high frequency of calcined remains); plans for this work are
underway.
Goldberg et al. (2009) went on to argue that both a lower
quantity of phytoliths and a relatively smaller number of sedge
seeds in the HP may indicate that the construction of plant-based
bedding (and the burning of this bedding) did not take place during
this phase. This could account for the lesser intensity of burning
represented in the HP faunal assemblage, and may suggest that the
behaviors that resulted in the high frequencies of burned bone
were not the same during the HP and post-HP MSA. However, it is
worth noting that while seeds are relatively scarce in the HP
deposits, sedges are still presentdand in fact make up a majority of
the seed assemblage from this phase (Sievers, 2006). It is thus
possible that bedding was being constructed and burned during the
HP, although perhaps on a smaller scale, with the more extensive
mixing of deposits erasing any clear signature of this behavior on
a micromorphogical scale.
Identifying whether bone was burned dry or green may speak to
whether or not the bone was burned post-depositionally, as one
might expect bone burned as a result of post-depositional exposure
to heat to be burned dry, while bone burned during cooking or as
a means of disposing of food waste would presumably be burned
green. If bone was being used as fuel, it may also have been more
likely to be burned green, as experimental work has demonstrated
that green bone serves as a more effective fuel source than does dry
bone (Théry-Parisot et al., 2005). Buikstra and Sweagle (1989)
found that only deﬂeshed green bone became uniformly
“smoked” (i.e., blackened), arguing that dry bone had insufﬁcient
organic substance to be uniformly smoked. However, Nicholson

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

HP

post-HP MSA 2

100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

2657

0%

<2cm non-ID

>2cm non-ID

ID

<2cm non-ID

>2cm non-ID

ID

NB/LB

45237

6882

2088

NB/LB

23074

4415

143

MB

47072

3103

960

MB

16447

3064

298

HB

21391

753

342

HB

40277

6471

592

post-HP MSA 1
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

<2cm non-ID

>2cm non-ID

ID

NB/LB

52217

10376

272

MB

41774

8243

250

HB

36127

5439

201

Fig. 6. Frequency of burning by bone type and phase.

(1993) found that mottling was common even among green bones,
so it is not clear that this is an appropriate criterion for differentiating between bone that was burned green or dry in the Sibudu
assemblage.

Table 4
The proportion of burned bone among identiﬁed and non-identiﬁed bones from
several Paleolithic contexts.
Site
Castanet Aurignacian
Combe Sauniere IV
Cuzoul layer 23
Cuzoul layer 17
Saint Cesaire
Aurignacian I (5)
Saint Cesaire
Chatelperronian (8)
Saint Cesaire
Mousterian (10)
Sibudu post-HP MSA 1
Sibudu post-HP MSA 2
Sibudu HP

Non-ID
bones
47,454
6378
18,554
4411
34,202

% Non-ID NISP % NISP Source
burned
burned
79.52%
32.42%
34.85%
32.35%
38.77%

748
532
2798
577
4102

3.21%
1.50%
14.87%
8.84%
3.66%

27,045 27.79%

966 0.21%

19,569 36.22%

867 1.85%

a

154,176 59.40%
93,748 70.67%a
124,438 58.11%a

Villa et al., 2004
Villa et al., 2004
Villa et al., 2004
Villa et al., 2004
Morin, 2004
Morin, 2004
Morin, 2004

a

723 62.38% This study
1033 86.16%a This study
3390 38.41%a This study

a
Note: the percentage of burned bone presented for the Sibudu assemblages
includes only the moderate and highly burned classes, and thus the true frequency
of burning is even higher than the numbers suggest.

Another line of evidence that may speak to whether or not the
bone was intentionally burned may be found in the lithic assemblage. If the majority of the burning occurred as a result of postdepositional exposure to heat, one might expect that the lithic
materials would also be burned (Asmussen, 2009; Dibble et al.,
2009). However, the two most common raw material types at
Sibudu are hornfels and dolerite, and in the absence of more
extreme forms heat damage such as ﬁre-cracking or pot-lidding
(which are relatively uncommon; w1% of the HP lithics from units
B5/B6 show potlidding), it would be difﬁcult to ascertain whether
these materials were exposed to heat from overlying hearths, as
color changes are not expected (Wadley, 2006; Wadley, personal
communication).
The distribution of burning damage across bone surfaces has
been used as yet another source of information on the timing and
mechanism of burning, particularly in drawing inferences about
cooking or processing tactics. Scholars have used the distribution of
burning on epiphyses vs. shafts to draw inferences about cooking
practices; if burning is greater on epiphyses than on shafts, then the
damage may have occurred during roasting, as the joints would
have been more directly exposed to heat, not being encased in meat
(e.g., Speth and Tchernov, 2001). The opposite pattern (more
burning on shafts than epiphyses) could indicate bones were
exposed to ﬁre after the meat was removed, perhaps as a result of
warming marrow bones prior to marrow extraction (e.g., Speth and
Clark, 2006). Unfortunately, the nature of the burning at Sibudu, in

2658

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

which material is often burned on all surfaces, precludes this type
of analysis. While some burning may have been related to food
preparation, such signatures would likely have been overprinted by
subsequent heat exposure.
There remain at least two possibilities to account for the high
frequency/intensity of burning damage in the Sibudu assemblage:
bone could have been deliberately used as a source of fuel, or it may
have been discarded into the ﬁre as a means of disposing of food
waste. Experimental work by Théry-Parisot and colleagues
(Costamagno et al., 2005, 2009; Théry-Parisot, 2002, Théry-Parisot
et al., 2005; Théry-Parisot and Costamagno 2005) has demonstrated that bone can serve as an effective fuel (see also Mentzer,
2009). Although the high kindling temperature of bone means that
an initial supply of fuel is necessary to set bone on ﬁredKedrowski
et al. (2009) demonstrated that bone ﬁres can be built and sustained
using only dry grass as kindlingdthe use of bone as an additional
fuel source serves to increase the duration of a ﬁre relative to the use
of wood alone. All bone (cancellous vs. cortical, green vs. dry) was
shown to have this effect; however, the duration of the ﬁre was
longest when spongy bone was used, likely because of the fat contained within the trabecular bone (Théry-Parisot et al., 2005).
Based on these results, Costamagno et al. (2005, 2009) argued
that a preponderance of burned spongy bone (particularly as
compared to compact bone) in an archaeological assemblage is
strong evidence in favor of the use of bone as fuel. In contrast, if
bone were simply thrown in a hearth as a means of eliminating
food waste, all skeletal tissuedboth cortical and spongy bonedshould be burned (Théry-Parisot et al., 2005). Paleolithic sites
such as Abri Pataud and Cuzoul de Vers (both in France) preserve
horizons with large quantities of burned spongy bone relative to
cortical bone, while also preserving relatively small samples of
wood charcoal (Théry-Parisot, 2002; Villa et al., 2004). In each of
these cases, the authors argued that bone was intentionally used as
a fuel source. A preponderance of burned bone, combined with
a relative scarcity of charcoal, has also been used to argue for the
use of bone as fuel at the Paleolithic site of Hohle Fels (Germany;
Schiegl et al., 2003).
Based in large part on their extensive ﬁre experiments,
Costamagno et al. (2009) recently reported on a new multivariate
approach for ascertaining the source of burned bone at an
archaeological site; their methodology was designed to discriminate between bone that was intentionally burned as fuel, bone that
was not intentionally used for fuel, and bone that may have been
used for fuel and/or was burned during site maintenance activities.
Data required to apply this methodology include information on
the relative frequency of burned spongy bone, data on the intensity
of fragmentation, and on the intensity of combustion. Unfortunately, because my data was collected prior to the publication of
this approach, at present, we cannot apply this methodology (most
notably, I did not separate the miscellaneous non-identiﬁable bone
into spongy and cortical fractions, and these bones comprise the
majority of the assemblage). In the future, we plan to alter our data
collection strategies so as to make the data more amenable to the
application of the system developed by Costamagno et al. (2009).
In making the argument that bone served as a fuel at Cuzoul de
Vers, Villa et al. (2004) took a relatively simpler approach, demonstrating via a chi-square test that spongy bone was signiﬁcantly
more likely to be burned than was cortical bonedthe condition to be
expected if bone was being used as fuel. While I cannot directly
replicate their analysis because my data are not amenable to being
divided into “burned” vs. “unburned” categories, I can compare the
proportion of rib/vertebrae fragments (spongy) and long bone shaft
fragments (cortical) that were unburned or lightly burned to those
that were moderately/highly burned (Table 5; data is from the nonidentiﬁed fraction and includes the less than and greater than 2 cm

Table 5
Data on the intensity of burning for spongy (ribs/vertebrae) vs. cortical bone (long
bone shaft fragments); HP and post-HP MSA combined.

Ribs/Vertebrae
Shaft fragments

NB/LB

MB/HB

2056
14,349

2143
28,905

bone). The difference is highly signiﬁcant (c2 ¼ 421.893; p < 0.0001),
but in this case, it is the cortical elements that are burned to a greater
degree. The same pattern is evidenced when the large and small
fraction non-identiﬁable remains are considered separately, and
when each unit under consideration is taken separately.
It is important to keep in mind, however, that spongy elements
such as the ribs and vertebrae may be more susceptible to postdepositional destruction as a result of their lower density, particularly after burning, and thus the recovery of these elements may
be diminished. However, the sheer quantity of burned cortical
bone, combined with the fact that charcoal is abundant throughout
the sample (Allott, 2005, 2006), suggests that the preferential
selection of spongy bone for fuel is not a sufﬁcient explanation for
the heavy burning evidenced in the assemblage. As such, while
recognizing that much of the burning at Sibudu may have resulted
from post-depositional exposure to heat, I would agree with Cain
(2005) that the disposal of food waste in ﬁre seems to be an
appropriate interpretation for at least some of the burning evidenced at Sibudu. And yet, it is worth noting that even if bone were
being discarded in the ﬁre primarily as a means of waste disposal,
once in the ﬁre, it would have also acted as a fuel sourcedand it
seems likely that Sibudu’s inhabitants would have become aware of
this useful secondary function.
As a whole, then, while incidental burning as a result of
exposure to overlying hearths cannot be ruled out, it seems that at
least two primary factors can account for the high frequency of
burned bone at Sibudu, both of which are associated with site
maintenance. First, the disposal of food waste into ﬁre, and
second, the repeated burning of plant-based bedding. As discussed above, if Goldberg et al. (2009) are correct that the
construction and burning of bedding was not taking place during
the HP (implying that most of the burning in this phase would
have been caused by disposal of food waste into ﬁre), then the
proximate cause of burning during the HP and post-HP MSA may
have been different. However, even under this scenario, it is
possible bone continued to be burned as a means of disposing of
food waste during the post-HP MSA, with the faunal assemblage
being exposed to further heat damage when bedding was burneddthis could account for the higher frequency/intensity of
burning during this phase.
4. Burned bone at Sibudu: taphonomic issues
Turning now to some of the taphonomic issues related to
burned bone, several studies have documented that the act of
combustion, in and of itself, results in high degrees of fragmentation (Costamagno et al., 1998, 2005; Knight, 1985; Stiner et al.,
1995). In their bone-as-fuel experiments, Costamagno et al.
(2005) demonstrated the degree to which this was the casedon
average, whole humeri that were placed into a ﬁre fragmented
into 182 pieces, 56.9% of which were less than 2 cm in length.
While the severity of fragmentation varied based on whether the
bone was burned whole or fragmentary, fresh or dry, all of the
bones in their experiment fragmented to some degree during
combustion.
Experimental work by Stiner et al. (1995) also indicated that
burned bones are more fragile (and thus more prone to post-

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

depositional destruction) than unburned bones. They went on to
propose that the mechanical strength of the burned bone varies as
a function of the intensity of burning, with calcined bone being the
most fragile. The data at hand should allow us to evaluate, at least in
part, the hypothesis that more intensely burned bone is more
fragiledif this were the case, one would expect the average fragment size to be smaller for the heavily burned material than for the
other burning categories.
Table 6 provides data on the average fragment weight for each
burning category, divided by archaeological phase (based only on
the non-identiﬁed fraction). Because variation in fragment size
between the units under consideration may be biased by changes in
prey size (see Clark and Plug, 2008; Clark, 2009), we are focusing
only on variation within a given period. The heavily burned fragments do have the smallest average weight for each phase, lending
some support to Stiner et al.’s hypothesis; this difference is most
noticeable in the HP and post-HP MSA 2 deposits. However, in both
of the post-HP MSA assemblages, the moderately burned fragments
are actually somewhat larger than the unburned/lightly burned
fragments, which seems to be counter to expectations. While the
reasons for this are not entirely clear, it could be related to the
presence of gypsum in the post-HP MSA deposits. Macroscopic and
microscopic analyses have demonstrated that gypsum crystal
formation during the post-HP MSA resulted in the fragmentation of
bone (Cain, 2006; Clark, 2009; Schiegl and Conard, 2006). Because
gypsum requires moisture to form, it could be that bone which was
moderately burned (and thus more thoroughly dried) was less
susceptible to gypsum crystal formation than bone that was
unburned or only lightly burnt, resulting in a relatively lesser
degree of fragmentation.
Given that the most intensively burned material does seem to
be more heavily fragmented, one might then expect that the
fauna from the post-HP MSA 2 will be more fragmentary than
that from the HP or post-HP MSA 1, since the post-HP MSA 2
preserves a higher frequency of calcined bone. In this case, the
greater intensity of burning damage (and thus the potentially
higher degree of fragmentation) does not seem to directly relate
to the overall percent of identiﬁable bone, as the post-HP MSA 2
did not have lowest proportion of identiﬁable bone (see Clark,
2009; Clark and Plug, 2008). However, this is only one of
a myriad of ways of comparing the degree of fragmentation in an
assemblage. While a more detailed discussion of fragmentation at
Sibudu is beyond the scope of this paper (see Clark, 2009), the
larger point is that if one can demonstrate that there is a relationship between the intensity of burning and the degree of
fragmentation, and if the assemblages under consideration are
differentially affected by burning, one must conduct a detailed
analysis of fragmentation within the assemblage prior to drawing

2659

any behavioral inferences, as variability in the degree of fragmentation can bias comparisons of taxonomic and skeletal
element frequencies.
Burning can also negatively impact cortical preservation,
causing cracking and peeling of the cortical surface and eventually
the total loss of the original bone surface (Nicholson, 1993; Schmidt
and Symes, 2008). That this was a factor for the current assemblage
is clearly demonstrated by a consideration of burning status versus
cortical preservation (Fig. 7; degree of cortical preservation was
only recorded for the identiﬁed bone and was coded as ‘good’, ‘fair’,
or ‘poor’). Bones with ‘fair’ cortical preservation frequently showed
some degree of cracking and/or ﬂaking of the cortical surface, but
this damage was often only superﬁcial. This was very similar to the
type of heat damage described by Schmidt and Symes (2008:42) as
“[appearing] as a ﬁne mesh of patterned cracks similar to those
seen in old china or an aged painting.” Nicholson (1993) described
a similar form of damage that she referred to as “peeling surface
ﬁlms;” this damage occurred among bones heated to
w300e500  C. While this type of damage may not reduce the
visibility of some forms of surface modiﬁcations such as deep tooth
punctures and chop marks, lighter forms of damage such as cut
marks and tooth scores are unlikely to be well-preserved (see Clark,
2009; Clark and Plug, 2008; and Cain, 2006 for more speciﬁc
discussions of surface damage in the HP and post-HP MSA assemblage). Bones with ‘poor’ cortical preservation often did not
preserve any of the original cortical surface, either because it had
completely ﬂaked away, or, as was the case for much of the calcined
bone, because the bone had become chalky in texture. In these
cases, most forms of surface damage would not be expected to
preserve.
Given that the post-HP MSA 2 showed a much higher proportion
of calcined bone than did the other units, it is perhaps not
surprising that the phase also shows the greatest percentage of
bones with poor cortical preservation (Fig. 8). This has important
implications for analyses of variation in processing behavior based
on signatures of human activity such as cutmarks and percussion
damage, and suggests that comparisons of surface damage between
these phases may not be appropriate.

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%

Table 6
Average fragment weight by phase/burning category.

30%

Phase

Burning
category

Count

Weight (g)

Average weight (g)
per fragment

20%

post-HP MSA 1

NB/LB
MB
HB

62,593
50,017
41,566

23937.1
19318
15007.8

0.3824
0.3862
0.3611

10%

NB/LB
MB
HB

27,489
19,511
46,748

9150
7045.9
13997.8

0.3329
0.3611
0.2994

NB/LB
MB
HB

52,119
50,175
22,144

16568.6
11949.9
4245.9

0.3179
0.2382
0.1917

post-HP MSA 2

HP

0%

NB/LB

MB

Good

1272

462

HB
71

Fair

508

662

205

Poor

189

237

806

Fig. 7. Relationship between burning intensity and cortical preservation (identiﬁed
bone only).

2660

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661

100%

80%

60%
Good
Fair
Poor
40%

was the most heavily fragmented. We also demonstrated that heat
damage did in fact negatively impact cortical surface preservation.
These results indicate the importance of conducting thorough
taphonomic analyses prior to making broader comparisons
between units that show different frequencies or intensities of
burning damage.
Given that detailed studies of burned bone assemblages are still
relatively uncommon, we hope that we have helped to demonstrate
the relevance of incorporating such a studydincluding the analysis
of non-identiﬁable bonedas a part of more traditional faunal
analyses, as it is clear that this dataset has much to contribute to
broader interpretations of human behavior and site formation
processes.
Acknowledgments

20%

0%
HP

post-HP MSA 2

post-HP MSA 1

Fig. 8. Cortical preservation data by phase (identiﬁed bone only).

5. Conclusions
The ubiquitous presence of burned bone (more than half of the
assemblage shows at least moderate burning) is one of the deﬁning
characteristics of the HP and post-HP MSA fauna from Sibudu. To
date, we have yet to ﬁnd published data from another Paleolithic
assemblage that shows the same degree and intensity of burning
among all fragments, be they the small, non-identiﬁed fragments or
the identiﬁed bones. Sibudu thus provides a good venue for
exploring the behavioral and taphonmic implications of burned
bone from an archaeological context.
Before attempting to identify the timing and agent of burning in
this assemblage, it was ﬁrst necessary to classify the bone based on
the intensity of burning damage. Because organic or mineral
staining can mimic, the changes the color that result from exposure
to heat, a sample of bones were submitted for microscopic analysis
in order to conﬁrm that color was a valid indicator of thermal
alteration for the Sibudu assemblage. The results of this analysis,
which employed methodology derived from the ﬁeld of organic
petrology, indicated that visual classiﬁcation based on color was
appropriate for identifying burned bone in this assemblage.
The association of the burned bone with hearths and other
indicators of human activity, the intensity of burning, and the sheer
quantity of burned bone suggests that the bone was not burned as
a result of natural ﬁres and also implies that the burning is not
explainable solely as the result of unintentional processes. We
propose that the burning in both the HP and the post-HP MSA was
a reﬂection of site maintenance activities, although these activities
may have not been the same during the two periods. While bone
may have been discarded into ﬁre as a means of disposing of food
waste in both periods, micromorphological work by Goldberg et al.
(2009) indicated that a signiﬁcant portion of the burning in the
post-HP MSA may have resulted from the periodic burning of plantbased bedding. Future experimental work will be aimed at determining more precisely the nature and intensity of burning that
could be expected to result from this type of activity.
Turning to the larger taphonomic implications of the high
frequencies of burning; because the combustion of bone does result
in fragmentation (Costamagno et al., 1998, 2005), it is therefore not
surprising that the assemblages are also very heavily fragmented. A
comparison of the average fragment sizes for each burning category
indicated that, as predicted by Stiner et al. (1995), calcined bone

We would like to thank Lyn Wadley for providing access to the
Sibudu material and for her continued support, John Speth for his
comments on an earlier version of this manuscript, and the anonymous reviewers, who helped make this a stronger paper. Research
by JLC was partially supported by a research grant from Rackham
Graduate School (University of Michigan) and from the National
Science Foundation (Grant #0612606).
Appendix. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jas.2010.06.001.
References
Allott, L.F., 2005. Paleoenvironments of the Middle Stone Age at Sibudu Cave,
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: an analysis of archaeological charcoal, Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of the Witwatersrand.
Allott, L.F., 2006. Archaeological charcoal as a window on palaeovegetation and
wood-use during the Middle Stone Age at Sibudu Cave. South Afr. Humanit. 18,
173e201.
Asmussen, B., 2009. Intentional or incidental thermal modiﬁcation? Analysing site
occupation via burned bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 528e536.
Backwell, L., d’Errico, F., Wadley, L., 2008. Middle Stone Age bone tools from the
Howiesons Poort layers, Sibudu Cave. South Afr. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35, 1566e1580.
Bennett, J.L., 1999. Thermal alteration of buried bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 26, 1e8.
Berna, F., Ligouis, B., Schiegl, S., Albert, R.M., Schiegl S., Miller, C.E., Bar-Yosef, O.,
Dibble, H., Artioli, G., Conard, N., Goldberg, P., in preparation. High resolution
study of Paleolithic combustion features: preliminary results from Kebara Cave
(Israel), Pech de lAzé IV (France) and Hohle Fels (Germany).
Buikstra, J.E., Sweagle, M., 1989. Bone modiﬁcation due to burning: experimental
evidence. In: Bonnichsen, R., Sorg, M.H. (Eds.), Bone Modiﬁcation. University of
Main Center for the Study of the First Americans, Orono, pp. 247e258.
Cain, C.R., 2005. Using burned animal bone to look at Middle Stone Age occupation
and behavior. J. Archaeol. Sci. 32, 873e884.
Cain, C.R., 2006. Human activity suggested by the taphonomy of 60 ka and 50 ka
faunal remains from Sibudu Cave. South Afr. Humanit. 18 (1), 241e260.
Clark, J.L., 2009. Testing Models on the Emergence and Nature of Modern Human
Behavior: Middle Stone Age Fauna from Sibudu Cave (South Africa), unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Michigan.
Clark, J.L., Plug, I., 2008. Animal exploitation strategies during the South African
Middle Stone Age: Howiesons Poort and post-Howiesons Poort fauna from
Sibudu Cave. J. Hum. Evol. 54, 886e898.
Cochrane, G.W.G., 2008. The transition from Howieson’s Poort to post-Howieson’s
Poort industries in southern Africa. South Afr. Archaeol. Soc. Goodwin Ser. 10,
157e167.
Costamagno, S., Griggo, C., Mourre, V., 1998. Approche expérimentale d’un problème taphonomique: utilisation de combustible osseux au Paléolithique. Préhistoire Européenne 13, 167e194.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Castel, J.-C., Brugal, J.-P., 2009. Combustible ou
non? Analyse multifactorielle et modèles explicatifs sur des ossements brûlés
Paléolithiques. In: Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Henry, A. (Eds.), Gestion des
combustibles au Paléolithique et au Mésolithique: nouveaux outils, nouvelles
interpretations. BAR International Series 1914. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp.
65e84.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Brugal, J.-P., Guibert, R., 2005. Taphonomic
consequences of the use of bones as fuel. Experimental data and archaeological
applications. In: O’Connor, T. (Ed.), Biosphere to Lithosphere: New Studies in
Vertebrate Taphonomy. Oxbow Books, Oxford, pp. 51e62.

J.L. Clark, B. Ligouis / Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010) 2650e2661
David, B., 1990. How was this bone burnt? In: Solomon, S., Davidson, I., Watson, D.
(Eds.), Problem Solving in Taphonomy, Archaeological and Material Culture
Studies in Anthropology, vol. 2 University of Queensland, Australia, pp. 65e79.
Dibble, H.L., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.P., Mentzer, S., Niven, L., Richter, D.,
Sandgathe, D., Théry-Parisot, I., Turq, A., 2009. A preliminary report on Pech de
l’Aze IV, Layer 8 (Middle Paleolithic, France). PaleoAnthropology, 182e219.
Gifford-Gonzalez, D.P., 1989. Ethnographic analogues for interpreting modiﬁed
bones: some cases from East Africa. In: Bonnichsen, R., Sorg, M.H. (Eds.), Bone
Modiﬁcation. University of Maine Center for the Study of the First Americans,
Orono, pp. 179e246.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L., 2009.
Bedding, hearths and site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age at Sibudu,
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 1, 95e122.
Hanson, M., Cain, C.R., 2007. Examining histology to identify burned bone. J.
Archaeol. Sci. 34, 1902e1913.
Jacobs, Z., Roberts, R.G., Galbraith, R.F., Deacon, H.J., Grun, R., Mackay, A., Mitchell, P.,
Vogelsang, R., Wadley, L., 2008a. Ages for the Middle Stone Age of Southern
Africa: implications for human behavior and dispersal. Science 322, 733e735.
Jacobs, Z., Wintle, A.G., Duller, G.A.T., Roberts, R.G., Wadley, L., 2008b. New ages for
the post-Howiesons Poort, late and ﬁnal Middle Stone Age at Sibudu Cave,
South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci., 1790e1807.
Karkanas, P., Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Barkai, R., Frumkin, A.,
Gopher, A., Stiner, M.C., 2007. Evidence for habitual use of ﬁre at the end of the
Lower Paleolitihic: site formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Hum. Evol.
53, 197e212.
Kedrowski, B.L., Crass, B.A., Behm, J.A., Leutke, J.C., Nichols, A.L., Moreck, A.M.,
Holmes, C.E., 2009. GC/MS analysis of fatty acids from ancient hearth residues
at the Swan Point archaeological site. Archaeometry 51, 110e122.
Knight, J.A., 1985. Differential preservation of calcined bone at the Hirundo Site,
Alton, Maine, M.S. Thesis, Quaternary Science, University of Maine at Orono.
Ligouis, B., Bullinger, J., Leesch Plumettaz, D., 2006. Jais, lignite, charbon et autres
matières organiques fossiles: application de la pétrologie organique à l’étude des
éléments de parure et des fragments bruts. In: Le site magdalénian de Monruz, 1.
Premiers éléments pour l’analyse d’un habitat de plein air. Neuchâtel, Service et
Musée cantonal d’archéologie, Archéologie neuchâteloise, pp. 197e216.
Lombard, M., Clark, J.L., 2008. Variability and change in Middle Stone Age hunting
behavior: aspects from the lithic and faunal records. In: Badenhorst, S.,
Mitchell, P., Driver, J.C. (Eds.), Animals and People: Archaeozoological Papers in
Honour of Ina Plug. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 46e56.
Lyman, R.L., 1994. Vertebrate Taphonomy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mentzer, S., 2009. Bone as a fuel source: the effects of initial fragment size distribution. In: Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Henry, A. (Eds.), Gestion des combustibles au Paléolithique et au Mésolithique: nouveaux outils, nouvelles
interpretations. BAR International Series 1914. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 53e64.
Michel, V., Bocherens, H., Théry-Parisot, I., Valoch, K., Valensi, P., 2006. Coloring and
preservation state of faunal remains from the Neanderthal levels of Kulna Cave,
Czech Republic. Geoarchaeology 21, 479e501.
Morin, E., 2004. Late Pleistocene Population Interaction in Western Europe and
Modern Human Origins: New Insights Based on the Faunal Remains from SaintCesaire, Southwestern France. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Michigan.
Nicholson, R.A., 1993. A morphological investigation of burnt animal bone and an
evaluation of its utility in archaeology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 20, 411e428.
Pickering, R., 2006. Regional geology, setting and sedimentology of Sibudu Cave.
South Afr. Humanit. 18, 123e129.
Schiegl, S., Conard, N.J., 2006. The Middle Stone Age sediments at Sibudu: results from
FTIR spectroscopy and microscopic analyses. South Afr. Humanit. 18, 149e172.

2661

Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Pfretzschner, H.-U., Conard, N.J., 2003. Paleolithic burnt
bone horizons from the Swabian Jura: distinguishing between in situ ﬁreplaces
and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology 18, 541e565.
Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Conard, N.J., Goldberg, P., 2004a. Mineralogy, micromorphology, phytolith analysis and organic petrology of Middle Palaeolithic and
MSA Cave Sites: comparison between Sibudu (South Africa) and the Levant. In:
Geoarchaeology of the Eastern Mediterranean. University of Tübingen.
Schiegl, S., Stockhammer, P., Scott, C., Wadley, L., 2004b. A mineralogical and phytolith study of the Middle Stone Age hearths in Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. S. Afr. J. Sci. 100, 185e194.
Schmidt, C., Symes, S., 2008. The Analysis of Burned Human Remains. Academic
Press, New York.
Shahack-Gross, R., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1997. 1997. Black-coloured bones in
Hayonim Cave, Israel: differentiating between burning and oxide staining. J.
Archaeol. Sci. 24, 439e446.
Shipman, P., Foster, G., Schoeninger, M., 1984. Burnt bones and teeth: an experimental study of color, morphology, crystal structure and shrinkage. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 11, 307e325.
Sievers, C., 2006. Seeds from the Middle Stone Age layers at Sibudu Cave. South Afr.
Humanit. 18 (1), 203e222.
Sievers, C., Wadley, L., 2008. Going underground: experimental carbonization of
fruiting structures under hearths. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35, 2909e2917.
Speth, J.D., Clark, J.L., 2006. Hunting and overhunting in the Levantine late Middle
Paleolithic. Before Farming 3, 1e42.
Speth, J.D., Tchernov, E., 2001. Neandertal hunting and meat-processing in the Near
East: evidence from Kebara Cave (Israel). In: Stanford, C.B., Bunn, H.T. (Eds.),
Meat-Eating and Human Evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 52e72.
Stiner, M.C., 2005. The Faunas of Hayonim Cave, Israel: A 200,000-Year Record of
Paleolithic Diet, Demography, and Society. Peabody Museum Press, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1995. Differential burning, recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 22,
223e237.
Taylor, G.H., Teichmüller, M., Davis, A., Diessel, C.E.K., Littke, R., Robert, P., 1998.
Organic Petrology. Gebrüder Borntraeger, Berlin.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2002. Fuel management (bone and wood) during the lower
Aurignacian in the Pataud rock shelter (Lower Paleolithic, Les Eyzies de Tayac,
Dordogne, France). Contribution of experimentation. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29,
1415e1421.
Théry-Parisot, I., Costamagno, S., 2005. Propriétés combustibles des ossments:
données expérimentales et réﬂexions archéologiques sur leur emploi dans les
sites paléolithiques. Gallia Préhistoire 47, 235e254.
Théry-Parisot, I., Costamagno, S., Brugal, J.-P., Fosse, P., Guibert, R., 2005. The use of
bone as fuel during the Paleolithic, experimental study of bone combustible
properties. In: Mulville, J.P., Outram, A.K. (Eds.), The Zooarchaeology of Milk and
Fats. Oxbow Books, Oxford, pp. 50e59.
Villa, P., Castel, J.C., Beauval, C., Bourdillat, V., Goldberg, P., 2004. Human and
carnivore sites in the European Middle and Upper Paleolithic: Similarities and
differences in bone modiﬁcation and fragmentation. Revue de Paleobiologie,
Geneve 23, 705e730.
Wadley, L., 2006. Partners in grime: results of multi-disciplinary archaeology at
Sibudu Cave. South Afr. Humanit. 18 (1), 315e341.
Wadley, L., 2009. Post-depositional heating may cause over-representation of redcoloured ochre in Stone Age sites. S. Afr. Archaeol. Bull. 64 (190), 166e171.
Wadley, L., Jacobs, Z., 2006. Sibudu Cave: background to the excavations, stratigraphy and dating. South Afr. Humanit. 18, 1e26.

