Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Human Evolution
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhevol

A previously undescribed organic residue sheds light on heat
treatment in the Middle Stone Age
Patrick Schmidt a, *, Guillaume Porraz b, c, Ludovic Bellot-Gurlet d, Edmund February e,
line Paris d, Pierre-Jean Texier g, John E. Parkington h,
Bertrand Ligouis f, Ce
Christopher E. Miller f, Klaus G. Nickel i, Nicholas J. Conard a
a

Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Department of Prehistory and Quaternary Ecology, Schloss Hohentübingen, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
CNRS, USR 3336, UMIFRE 25, Institut Français d'Afrique du Sud (IFAS), Johannesburg, South Africa
Evolutionary Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
d
Sorbonne Universit
es, UPMC Universit
e Paris 6, MONARIS “de la Mol
ecule aux Nano-objets: R
eactivit
e, Interactions et Spectroscopies”, UMR 8233,
UPMC-CNRS, 4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 5, France
e
University of Cape Town, Department of Biological Sciences, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
f
Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Institute for Archaeological Sciences, Rümelinstrasse 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
g
CNRS, UMR 5199-PACEA, Universit
e de Bordeaux 1, Talence, France
h
University of Cape Town, Department of Archaeology, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
i
EberhardKarls University of Tübingen, Department of Geosciences, Applied Mineralogy, Wilhelmstraße 56, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
b
c

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 17 April 2014
Accepted 1 May 2015
Available online 12 June 2015

South Africa has in recent years gained increasing importance for our understanding of the evolution of
‘modern human behaviour’ during the Middle Stone Age (MSA). A key element in the suite of behaviours
linked with modern humans is heat treatment of materials such as ochre for ritual purposes and stone
prior to tool production. Until now, there has been no direct archaeological evidence for the exact
procedure used in the heat treatment of silcrete. Through the analysis of heat-treated artefacts from the
Howiesons Poort of Diepkloof Rock Shelter, we identiﬁed a hitherto unknown type of organic residue e a
tempering-residue e that sheds light on the processes used for heat treatment in the MSA. This black
ﬁlm on the silcrete surface is an organic tar that contains microscopic fragments of charcoal and formed
as a residue during the direct contact of the artefacts with hot embers of green wood. Our results suggest
that heat treatment of silcrete was conducted directly using an open ﬁre, similar to those likely used for
cooking. These ﬁndings add to the discussion about the complexity of MSA behaviour and appear to
contradict previous studies that had suggested that heat treatment of silcrete was a complex (i.e.,
requiring a large number of steps for its realization) and resource-consuming procedure.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Modern behaviour
Silcrete heat treatment
Residue analysis
Transformative technology

1. Introduction
In recent years, human origins research has focused on South
Africa as a key region for the beginnings of ‘modern human
behaviour’ during the Middle Stone Age (MSA). The suite of behaviours that archaeologists view as characterizing the emergence of
modernity includes the production of standardized stone tool types
(Clark, 1988; McBrearty and Brooks, 2000) and elaborate bone tools
(Henshilwood et al., 2001; Backwell et al., 2008), the invention of
-Duhaut et al., 2013),
compound adhesives (Wadley, 2010; Charrie

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: patrick.schmidt@uni-tuebingen.de (P. Schmidt).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2015.05.001
0047-2484/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

symbolic behaviour (Henshilwood et al., 2002, 2009; Texier et al.,
2013) and heat treatment of silcrete, a local, ﬁne-grained lithic raw
material (Brown et al., 2009; Mourre et al., 2010). Because knapping
heat-treated rock requires less force and allows better accuracy in
obtaining the desired end-products (Crabtree and Butler, 1964;
Purdy and Brooks, 1971; Inizan et al., 1976; Domanski et al., 1994;
Schmidt et al., 2012) this knowledge may have been decisive in
the evolutionary history of anatomically modern humans. Understanding the procedures used for lithic heat treatment, and the degree of complexity and investment associated with them, is thus of
great importance. Some authors (Brown et al., 2009; Brown and
Marean, 2010; Wadley, 2013; Wadley and Prinsloo, 2014) suggest a
rather complicated procedure for heat treatment that is both time
and resource consuming because it relies on slow, indirect heating in

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

a sand-bath under a ﬁre specially built for this purpose. Others
(Schmidt et al., 2013) have argued that heat treatment of silcrete
might have been a much faster and more efﬁcient process using the
glowing embers from regular domestic ﬁres.
When silcrete is heated, it undergoes several readily identiﬁable
physical changes. These changes include reddening (Schindler
et al., 1982), occasional heat fracturing (Mercieca, 2000), the loss
of porosity (Schmidt et al., 2013) and increased brittleness
(Domanski and Webb, 1992). However, the identiﬁcation of these
characteristics does not directly imply intentional heating since, in
post-depositional contexts, unintentional heating of artefacts can
occur through indirect heating below a hearth or due to natural
ﬁres. Heat treatment may unambiguously be considered intentional only when one can demonstrate that an artefact was knapped after heating. This must be conﬁrmed on the basis of
technological arguments such as fracture pattern and sequence of
ﬂake negatives: fracture surfaces resulting from ﬂakes removed
after heat treatment (post-heating surfaces) are smoother or more
glossy than fracture surfaces from before heat treatment (preheating surfaces) (Olausson and Larsson, 1982; Schmidt, 2013). This
difference of fracture pattern is due to heat-induced transformations of the rocks' mechanical properties (Schmidt et al.,
2012, 2013; Schmidt, 2013) and a comparison of the roughness
allows one to determine whether a ﬂake was knapped before or
after heat treatment.
The scope of this work is to identify these markers of intentional
heat treatment on silcrete artefacts from the Howiesons Poort of
the South African MSA site of Diepkloof Rock Shelter (Western
Cape, South Africa) and to compare them with experimental
reference material. We also try to identify proxies that help us
understand the procedures used for heat treatment in the MSA. In
order to do so, we conducted heat treatment experiments using
silcrete types recorded in the site and the wood of plant species
growing in the vicinity of the shelter and documented in its MSA
record (Cartwright, 2013). After a ﬁrst study (Schmidt et al., 2013)
that addressed the thermally induced structural and crystallographic transformations in South African silcrete, in order to understand the parameters necessary for heat treatment of this
material, we aim in the present study to test the hypotheses about
heat treatment procedures that resulted from our initial mineralogical study.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Archaeological samples
We analysed all plotted silcrete artefacts from two Howiesons
Poort (HP) stratigraphic units (SU) Frank and Frans. These two SUs
were chosen because of their high proportion of silcrete artefacts
(ca. 40% of all lithic material [Porraz et al., 2013]). They both belong
to what has been called the ‘intermediate HP’, characterized technologically by the production of blades and bladelets and typologically by the production of backed tools and strangulatednotched pieces. All of the plotted silcrete artefacts coming from
an excavated surface of 6 m2 (squares N-M6, N-M7, N-M8
[Parkington et al., 2013]) were analysed and represent a total of 574
pieces for the SU Frank and 691 pieces for the SU Frans. Additionally, one unplotted silcrete artefact recovered from a proﬁle
collapse of the SUs John to Darryl (Intermediate and Late HP) was
selected for destructive analyses.
2.2. Experimental heat treatment
For heat treatment experiments, we collected silcrete samples of
good knapping quality from the Malmesbury area. Silcrete from this

23

region is one of the materials that the MSA inhabitants of Diepkloof
used extensively (Porraz et al., 2013). We built a set of outdoor
camp ﬁres using wood of four local southern African plant species
that were reported in the charcoal record of the Diepkloof
Howiesons Poort layers (Cartwright, 2013): Heeria argentea
(Thunb.) Meissner, Diospyros glabra (L.), Searsia laevigata (L.) F.A.
Barkley var. villosa (L.f.) Moffett and Podocarpus elongatus (Ait.) L'
Herit. ex Pers. Three days before the heat treatment experiments,
the wood of these four species was cut from living plants in the
vicinity of the shelter. All ﬁres used during the experiments were
started in the same way: ﬁrst, approximately 1e2 kg of the thinnest
branches including green leaves was lit. When the leaves were
burnt down and the thin branches became ﬁne glowing embers,
the thick white smoke caused by the leave's moisture disappeared
and the ﬁrst visible ﬂames appeared. The thicker branches were
then progressively added, building up a stable camp ﬁre that could
be sustained for several hours by adding more wood. This procedure allowed for the lighting of the freshly cut green wood without
too much effort. Furthermore, this procedure allowed for the rapid
formation of a cone of ash and embers at the base of the ﬁre (up to
10 cm high at its centre) due to the burnt thin branches and leaves.
The temperatures at different places within these camp ﬁre structures (ﬂames, glowing embers, ash cone at the base of the ﬁres)
were monitored using K-type thermocouples. Based on these ﬁres,
two experimental setups were used for heat treatment.
[Exp. 1]: As suggested by Schmidt et al. (2013), we scraped some
glowing embers away from the bottom part of the camp ﬁre and
used these embers to cover a block of silcrete (at a distance of about
30 cm from the actual ﬁre; Fig. 1a, b). The temperature evolution of
three such silcrete/ember piles (P. elongatus, S. laevigata and
D. glabra) was monitored with K-type thermocouples placed under
the blocks before the experiment (the probes were placed beneath
the blocks at >3 cm distance from the nearest glowing embers,
measuring the effective heating rate in the silcrete). After four
hours and 20 min the experiments were stopped and the silcrete
was removed from the ashes that had cooled down.
[Exp. 2]: A second experiment was conducted in parallel using
two of the ﬁres (S. laevigata and D. glabra). For this, a block of silcrete was pushed directly into the ash-cone at the bottom of each
ﬁre (Fig. 1c, d). Measuring the temperature evolution within these
blocks was not straightforward because the ash-cone already had
an initial high temperature before the blocks were introduced. We
therefore ﬁrst placed a thermocouple at the bottom of the cone and
then pushed the cold block of silcrete onto the probe. The blocks
were left beneath the ﬁres until these had stopped burning and
cooled down but temperature recording beneath the blocks was
stopped after two hours.
[Exp. 3]: We conducted a third set of experiments aiming to
investigate the risk of overheating (Schmidt, 2014) of silcrete during the heat treatment procedure. This experiment did not aim to
reproduce the actual conditions of heat treatment at Diepkloof but
was designed to understand the relation between heat-induced
fracturing (overheating) in different volumes of silcrete and high
temperatures/fast heating-rates. For this, we tried to create
‘extreme conditions’ by applying temperatures and heating-rates to
the silcrete that are higher than what can be expected using wood
of the plant species identiﬁed from the charcoal at Diepkloof
(Cartwright, 2013). Experiment 3 was therefore realized with the
same procedure as Experiment 1 but using a southern African
woody species, Acacia erioloba E.Mey, which is not endemic to
Diepkloof but does produce particularly high temperatures and fast
heating rates. When glowing, the embers of A. erioloba maintain a
temperature above 500  C for several hours without dying down,
delivering a relatively high and constant amount of energy to the
silcrete that is heated up to 550  C with a ramp rate of 20  C/min (a

24

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

Figure 1. Photographs and schematic drawings of the two experimental protocols used for heat treatment during Experiment 1 (a, b) and Experiment 2 (c, d). In (a), the heattreated silcrete block buried under the embers is marked by an arrow. Temperature ranges in the schematic drawings correspond to maximum temperatures measured during
heat treatment experiments, cf. Figure 2.

typical temperature curve measured during Experiment 3 is shown
in the Supplementary Online Material [SOM]). We conducted these
heating experiments with 10 silcrete blocks of different volume
(Table 1).
[Exp. 4]: To produce a larger reference collection of pre- and
post-heating surfaces from a broader selection of silcrete types, we
heat-treated 10 more blocks of different silcrete types from the
West Coast of South Africa in an electrical furnace (average heating
rate: 15  C/min; maximum temperature: 500  C; time at maximum
temperature: two hours; then progressive cooling to room temperature). This larger reference collection helped in evaluating the
smoothness of pre- and post-heating surfaces of the Diepkloof
lithics by direct comparison. Sample provenances are summarized
in Table 1 and petrographic and mineralogical descriptions of some
of the samples can be found in Schmidt et al. (2013).
The effective cooling rate of the silcrete appears to be important
for successful heat treatment. During preliminary experiments
aimed at setting some of the parameters for Experiments 1, 2 and 3,
we observed a phenomenon that systematically leads to failure of
the heat treatment. When we interrupted the heat treatment by
removing the silcrete from the embers, a sequence of click sounds
could be heard from within the pieces. Knapping of these pieces of
silcrete after cooling to room temperature revealed them to be
internally fractured and useless for stone tool production. This
phenomenon was already observed by Micheelsen (1966) on ﬂint

and can most likely be explained by stress created in the rocks
during negative thermal expansion upon fast cooling. Despite the
lack of conclusive experimental data, we believe that in the case of
silcrete, cooling rate is more crucial to the success or failure of heat
treatment than heating rate. In order to eliminate fast cooling rates
as a possible source of failure, the pieces of silcrete that were heat
treated during all of our experiments were removed from their
heating environments only after these had naturally cooled to room
temperature.
2.3. Chemical analysis of residues
Examining the archaeological and experimentally heat-treated
silcrete, we observed a black residue deposited on the surfaces of
some of the archaeological and experimental samples. This residue
was analysed microscopically to characterize its structure and formation. We therefore selected one bladelet (DRSc1) recovered from
a proﬁle collapse of the HP layers John to Darryl and, in order to
compare the structure of the archaeological black residue with a
modern reference sample, a ﬂake was removed from one of the
experimentally heat-treated blocks from Experiment 3. These two
samples were cut with a diamond-tipped rock saw perpendicular
to the surfaces containing the residues, embedded in resin and dry
polished to obtain plane sections for reﬂected light microscopy.
During dry polishing of the sections, we used low pressure, slow

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

25

Table 1
Silcrete samples, origins, sample sizes and conditions used for heat treatment.
Exp. nr

Sample nr

Nearest town to outcrop

Samples used during the experiments using ﬁres:
[Exp. 1]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 2]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 1]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 2]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 1]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 1]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
[Exp. 3]
WK-13-08b
Malmesbury
Samples used during the furnace experiment:
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-2
Redelinghuys
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-10A
Philadelphia
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-12A
Malmesbury
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-17A
Velddrif
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-22A
Piketberg
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-22B
Piketberg
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-56
Strandfontein
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-56b
Strandfontein
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-61F
Koekenaap
[Exp. 4]
SA-11-65B
Brand se Baai

Heating environment

Weight (g)

Volume (cm3)

S. laevigata embers
S. laevigata ash cone
D. glabra embers
D. glabra ash cone
P. elongates embers
H. argentea embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers
A. erioloba embers

182
397
197
188
256
169
205
301
445
569
905
1038
1372
1511
1715
1850
83
26
166
188
109
67
56
25
33
102

furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace
furnace

HINC

Tempering-residue

69
151
75
71
97
64
78
114
169
216
344
394
521
574
651
702

No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

32
10
63
71
41
25
21
9
13
39

No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Volumes are calculated from the mass of the blocks based on the speciﬁc gravity of quartz 2.634 g/cm3. HINC ¼ Heat-induced non-conchoidal fracture.

polishing-wheel speed and no water or oil for cooling to avoid any
alteration or loss of organic matter through dissolution. The two
sections were analysed under white and blue reﬂected light using a
Leitz DMRX microscope with oil immersion lenses at magniﬁcations from 200 up to 1000.
In the second step, we investigated the chemical composition of
the archaeological residues by infrared spectroscopy using nondestructive micro-ATR analysis on the surfaces of six lithic artefacts from Diepkloof (DRSc1 and DRSc8 from the collapse of SUs
John to Darryl; DRS894, DRS762, DRS2676 and DRS1276 from SU
Frank). A Bruker IRscope II microscope with a 20 germanium-ATR
objective connected to an FT-IR Equinox 55 spectrometer was used
for this infrared ATR surface analysis (maximum size of the analysed area 100 mm2, spectra acquired between 600 and 4000 cm1,
resolution 2 cm1). In order to compare the chemistry of the
archaeological residue to a possible modern source material, we
burned a drop of resin from H. argentea wood collected during
ﬁeldwork and analyzed it using diamond ATR-IR (Agilent Cary 660IR FTIR spectrometer, spectra acquired between 600 and
4000 cm1, resolution 1 cm1).
Additionally, we acquired Raman spectra between 100 and
1900 cm1 on the seven samples with a Horiba Jobin Yvon HR800
spectrometer equipped with Notch Brag Grate ﬁlters, an Arþ
exciting laser (wavelength 514 nm) and a 600 lines/mm grating.
The spectrometer was calibrated using the 520.5 cm1 band of a Si
crystal.
3. Results

ash cones at the bottom of these ﬁres showing temperatures above
500  C.
Temperature evolution curves of the embers/silcrete piles of
Experiment 1 and of the silcrete in the ash-cones of Experiment 2
are shown in Figure 2. Heat treatment of silcrete during Experiment
1 produced maximum temperatures of z350  C using P. elongatus
and S. laevigata and z390  C using D. glabra (Fig. 2a). Effective
heating rates within the silcrete blocks can be estimated to be between 4  C/min and 5  C/min, being fastest in the beginning of the
heating process with up to 8  C/min. The two silcrete blocks of
Experiment 2 were heated to maximum temperatures of
z380e400  C and underwent heating rates of 9  C/min (Fig. 2b).
Five of the six blocks heated during Experiments 1 and 2 do not
show any sign of overheating (cracking or crazing) whereas the
silcrete heated in the D. glabra ash-cone had fractured (Table 1).
Maximum temperatures and heating rates during Experiment 3
(z550  C and z20  C/min) were signiﬁcantly higher than the ones
produced by the wood of the four plant species of Experiment 1 and
2 (SOM Fig. 1). After these ‘extreme heating conditions’, six of the 10
silcrete blocks heated in Experiment 3 do not show any sign of
overheating and four blocks had fractured in their peripheral areas
(Table 1). The inner, intact part of all fractured blocks, which shows
no signs of overheating, could be knapped perfectly and the only
effect of the heat-induced fractures is a reduction of the effective

Table 2
Temperatures (Temp.) measured at different places in the ﬁres used for heat
treatment.

3.1. Experimental heat treatment

Plant species

Temp. of
ﬂames

The temperatures measured at different places in the four ﬁres
using green wood are summarized in Table 2. These ﬁres using four
different woody species (H. argentea, D. glabra, S. laevigata, P.
elongatus) exhibited rather different temperatures with none of the

P. elongatus
H. argentea
D. glabra
S. laevigata

880
730
630
750



C
C

C

C


Temp. of glowing
embers
790
520
560
580



C
C

C

C


Temp. within the ash cone
at the bottom of the ﬁre
480
430
420
460



C
C

C

C


26

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

3.2. Flake scar roughness on artefacts and experimental samples

Figure 2. Temperature curves measured during Experiment 1 and Experiment 2.
(a) ¼ [Exp. 1]: heat treatment in embers scraped away from a ﬁre, (b) ¼ [Exp. 2]: heat
treatment in the ash-cone at the bottom of a burning ﬁre. For details about the temperature measurements and placements of the probes, see section Materials and
methods.

knappable volume. Once the heat-treated silcrete blocks had
cooled to ambient temperature, we removed them from the ashes
and knapped a few ﬂakes. All of these ﬂakes have smoother fracture
surfaces than control ﬂakes removed before the procedure, thereby
indicating successful heat treatment. Thus, even though heatinduced fracturing occurred in some of our samples, this did not
compromise the overall aim of the heat treatment, i.e., increasing
the quality of the raw material for knapping. Furthermore, no clear
correlation between heat-induced fracturing and volume could be
established during our experiments.
All six silcrete blocks heat-treated in Experiment 1 and 2 exhibit
a thin black ﬁlm coating part of their surface (Fig. 5e, f, Fig. 6d). This
black opaque ﬁlm, which appears to be a residue resulting from the
contact between silcrete and embers/ashes, is insoluble in water or
ethanol, tightly adheres to the surface and cannot be rubbed off by
hand or with a brush. Five blocks heat-treated during Experiment 3
also exhibit this black ﬁlm on part of their surface. Because this
black residue can clearly be assigned to heat treatment of the silcrete, we hence call it a ‘tempering-residue’.
During Experiment 4, the electrical furnace experiment, one of
the 10 blocks cracked peripherally but the two resulting fragments
show no signs of overheating. When knapped, all heat-treated
silcrete exhibited post-heating fracture surfaces that are
smoother than the pre-heating surfaces (compare Fig. 3a and b).
The silcrete heat-treated in the furnace does not show any alteration of the surface and no ﬁlm or residue can be observed on the
surface.

Our results of the comparison between experimentally heattreated reference samples and archaeological artefacts from SUs
Frans and Frank are shown in Table 3. From layer Frans, 96.7% of all
analyzed artefacts were knapped after heat treatment as indicated
by the presence of smooth post-heating removal scars. From layer
Frank, 93.7% of all artefacts could clearly be identiﬁed as knapped
after heat treatment. Nineteen percent of the artefacts from Frans
and 23.2% of the artefacts from Frank preserve rough pre-heating
removal scars in addition to the post-heating scars (Fig. 3cef).
During our heat treatment experiments, we had also observed
another type of fracture that is not due to conchoidal fracturing as it
occurs during knapping. This type of fracture is induced by heating
of the silcrete, hence we call it ‘heat-induced non-conchoidal
fracture’ (HINC-fracture). Such fractures can be easily recognized
visually: surfaces resulting from heat-induced failure (HINC-fracture-surfaces) show strong roughness and abundant scalar features
that are rare on conchoidal fracture negatives (Fig. 4). From a lithictechnological point of view, it is of great importance to distinguish
whether a heat-induced fracture occurred after discard of the
artefact, i.e., during post-depositional burning, or before knapping,
i.e., during heat treatment of the silcrete prior to knapping. In the
latter case it may be concluded that heat-induced fracturing was an
‘acceptable accident’ after which knapping could still be performed.
In order to make this distinction on Diepkloof artefacts, we identiﬁed as HINC-fractures only fracture-surfaces that are clearly
cross-cut by a post-heating removal scar (according to the criteria
in (Tixier et al., 1980)), indicating that knapping was done after the
heating. We observed such HINC-fractures on 7.2% of the artefacts
from Frans and 10.5% of the artefacts from Frank (Fig. 4def).
We also observed a black opaque ﬁlm on 22 artefacts from Frans
and 31 artefacts from Frank (Fig. 5aed) that had resisted burial and
washing. This ﬁlm is visually similar to the black ﬁlm identiﬁed on
the samples from our heat treatment experiments. On some artefacts, this residue covers a natural surface of the silcrete (weathered
or rolled exterior of the initial block used as raw material) whereas
on other artefacts it covers a pre-heating surface, hence, formed after
a ﬁrst stage of knapping prior to heat treatment. None of the smooth
post-heating surfaces are covered by a black ﬁlm or residue. On the
contrary, the ﬁlm is always cross-cut by the adjacent, clean, postheating fracture negatives (Fig. 5aed) indicating that its formation
on the silcrete surface was followed by a sequence of knapping. The
similarity of this archaeological residue with the black ﬁlm produced
during our heat treatment experiments, the tempering-residue, and
ratoire (i.e., after
the moment of its formation in the lithic chaîne ope
a ﬁrst stage of pre-heat-treatment-knapping but before knapping of
the heat-treated silcrete) strengthens the hypothesis that the
archaeological residue results from the heat treatment itself. To
conﬁrm whether the black ﬁlms observed on artefacts and experimental samples are indeed the same and to investigate the origin
and formation of the residue, we analysed them using optical microscopy, infrared and Raman spectroscopy.
3.3. Structural and chemical analysis
3.3.1. Microscopic analysis Under the reﬂected light microscope,
the structure of experimental and archaeological black residues is
very similar. They appear in both samples as a 1-to-20 mm-thick
deposit or ﬁlm on the surface of the silcrete artefacts (Fig. 6aec, e,
f). Thicker parts show ﬂow textures with pores formed by melt
degassing (Fig. 6b, c, f), indicating that the deposit was a liquid
during formation. Strongly reﬂecting micrometre-sized charcoal
particles (inertodetrinite [Taylor et al., 1998]) are cemented
within the residue. Thus, the archaeological and experimental

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

27

Figure 3. Comparison between experimentally heat-treated samples (aeb) and Diepkloof HP artefacts (cef). (a) Fracture surface of an experimental ﬂake removed before heat
treatment. (b) Fracture surface of a ﬂake removed after experimental heat treatment. Both photos were taken of ﬂakes struck from the same block of silcrete (WK-13-08b) before
and after heat treatment. (cef) Details of silcrete artefacts showing the contrast between rough pre-heat-treatment surfaces (left sides of the pictures) and smoother post-heattreatment surfaces on DRS816 (c), DRS1541 (d), DRS803 (e) and DRS928 (f).

residues were both deposited on the silcrete surface in a liquid state
at high temperatures (melt degassing pores, ﬂow texture) and
formed in the direct vicinity of charcoal (micrometre-sized
inertodetrinite fragments).
3.3.2. Infrared and Raman spectroscopy The infrared spectra of
the six analysed archaeological samples show the expected quartz
Table 3
Results of the analysis of ﬂake scar roughness of plotted artefacts from SUs Frank and
Frans of Diepkloof Rock Shelter.
SU Frans, total of analyzed artefacts: 691

Count

Percent

668
131
23
50
22
11
11

96.7%
19.0%
3.3%
7.2%
3.2%
1.6 %
1.6 %

538
133
36
60
31
14
17

93.7%
23.2%
6.3%
10.5%
5.4%
2.4 %
3.0 %

Artefacts with post-heating removal scars
Artefacts with pre- and post-heating removal scars
Non-diagnostic or not heat-treated artefacts
Artefacts with HINC-fracture surfaces
Total of artefacts with black tempering-residue
- of which the residue is found on pre-heating removal scars
- of which the residue is found on a natural surface
SU Frank, total of analyzed artefacts: 574
Artefacts with post-heating removal scars
Artefacts with pre- and post-heating removal scars
Non-diagnostic or not heat-treated artefacts
Artefacts with HINC-fracture surfaces
Total of artefacts with black tempering residue
- of which the residue is found on pre-heating removal scars
- of which the residue is found on a natural surface
Percentages refer to the total of analyzed artefacts in each layer.

bands resulting from the silcrete artefacts and additional CH bands
at 2857 cm1 and 2928 cm1 with a shoulder near 2960 cm1
conﬁrming the presence of an organic compound. Some of the
spectra also show a sharp C]O band caused by carbonyl groups at
1740 cm1 and two broad bands with several shoulders and features between 1380 cm1 and 1650 cm1 indicating a complex
mixture of organic structures (bands related mainly to CO vibrations; Fig. 7b, c). Reference spectra acquired on post-heating
surfaces of the artefacts show only quartz bands and no organic
components (Fig. 7d). Thus, the archaeological residue is clearly
an organic substance coating the silcrete.
The spectrum of the experimentally burned droplet of
H. argentea resin shows CH bands at identical positions and with
similar shape as observed in the spectra of archaeological residues. The carbonyl group band at 1740 cm1 is also present as
shoulder and several bands appear between 1380 cm1 and
1650 cm1 indicating a complex mixture of chemicals (Fig. 7a).
The direct comparison of the burnt resin and the spectra of
archaeological samples is not straightforward because some of
the organic substances contained in the residue during its formation may have been transformed or lost during taphonomic
processes. However, a great number of IR bands observed in the
burnt H. argentea resin spectrum are observed at least as features
in the spectra of the archaeological residues (Fig. 7a, b, c, left
inset), suggesting that both residues may have similar chemical
composition.

28

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

Figure 4. Photographs of heat-induced non-conchoidal (HINC) fracture surfaces on experimentally heat treated samples (aec) and Diepkloof lithics (def). Surfaces resulting from
heat-induced failure show strong roughness and abundant scalar features that are rare on conchoidal fracture negatives. Such scalar features are marked by arrows. (d) DRS928 (e)
DRS2074 (f) DRS2200.

Our Raman spectroscopic measurements of both experimental
and archaeological residues also show identical spectra with two
CC bands at 1370 cm1 (D band) and 1595 cm1 (G band) (Fig. 7e, f).
These CC bands, dominating the Raman spectra because of the
resonance of the CC bonds with the 514 nm exciting laser, have
identical shapes and positions in both samples. Our Raman spectra
reveal chemical bonds, which are not infrared active and that are
produced when organic substances are burnt at high temperature
through pyrolysis (Tomasini et al., 2012).
4. Discussion
4.1. Terminology used in this work
We use the term ‘smooth’ in our work (as the opposite of
‘rough’) as equivalent to ‘gloss’ in previous publications (Brown
et al., 2009). The reason we prefer the terms ‘smooth’ and ‘rough’
in our work to ‘glossy’ and ‘dull’ is because gloss was physically
measured using a gloss-meter in previous works on South African
South Coast silcrete (Brown et al., 2009) and we rather observed a
distinction in micro-relieve on the analyzed West Coast silcrete
types. The second term we use is ‘HINC-fracture’ that has a different
meaning than ‘pot-lid’. This distinction is made because the term
HINC-fracture describes a fracturing event that occurs during heat
treatment and after which knapping continued (i.e., HINC fractures
are cross-cut by smooth post-heating-scars). Therefore, ‘HINC’ has a

technological meaning. The term ‘pot-lid’ merely describes a
concave feature due to heat induced fracturing without the notion
of a continuing reduction sequence after the heat fracture occurred
(i.e., pot-lids may also occur during burning after discard).
4.2. The experimental heat treatment procedure
Using wood from plants identiﬁed in high abundance in the
Diepkloof deposits (Cartwright, 2013), both of our experiments
(Experiments 1 and 2) successfully heat treated silcrete from the
West Coast of South Africa. This ﬁnding corroborates the prediction
made in our previous work (Schmidt et al., 2013), that heat treatment of silcrete could have been practiced in the South African MSA
using the embers of domestic ﬁres. The relatively low heat treatment temperatures of 380e400  C in the ash-cones of Experiment
2 may appear contradictory to the measurements of the glowing
embers' temperatures of 520e790  C. This may be explained by the
following mechanism: the glowing embers at the outside of the
cone consume most of the oxygen, preventing the combustion of
the inner part of the ash-cone that remains at a relatively lower
temperature. This cooler inner part of the ash-cone insulates the
silcrete from the hot glowing embers. The same is true for large
piles of embers scraped away from a ﬁre. Thus, larger ash-cones or
piles of embers produce lower temperatures in their centre because
combustion is slowed down due to the restricted access of oxygen;
smaller piles produce higher temperatures because of the

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

29

Figure 5. Photographs, technical drawings and Macro-photos of tempering-residue observed on Diepkloof artefacts (aed) and experimentally heat treated silcrete (eef). (a) DRSc1,
(b) DRS894, (c) DRSc8, (d) DRS2676, (e, f) experimentally heat-treated fragments of sample WK-13-08b. Note the black tempering-residue (represented as grey surfaces in the
technical drawings) that covers rough pre-heating surfaces. The residue is cut by smooth post-heating fracture negatives of ﬂakes removed after heat treatment (aed).

30

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

Figure 6. Microscopic view of the tempering-residue. (aec) Micrographs of polished sections of the tempering-residue on DRSc1. Note the brighter inclusions corresponding to
charcoal fragments (red arrows) cemented in the wood tar and the pores due to degassing (blue arrows), reﬂected white light, oil immersion. (d) Silcrete block (WK-13-08b)
experimentally heat-treated with green wood using the experimental protocol of Experiment 1. Note the tempering-residue as black ﬁlm covering part of the surface of the block. (e,
f) Micrographs of polished sections of the tempering-residue on experimentally heat-treated silcrete. Note the similarity with the archaeological residues in (aec), reﬂected white
light, oil immersion (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

continuous ﬂow of oxygen feeding the combustion. The temperature ramp and maximum temperatures endured by silcrete heat
treated in this way must be expected to be a function of four
factors:
[1] the species and moisture of the wood (A. erioloba produces
signiﬁcantly higher temperatures than all other tested taxa);
[2] the size of the pile of ember or the ash-cone and the ﬁneness
of the embers/ashes that allow or restrict oxygen ﬂow to the
centre of the pile;
[3] the speed of wind controlling the amount of oxygen available
for the combustion (stronger wind produces higher temperatures and a less anoxic conditions within the embers);
[4] the size of the heated silcrete pieces (larger pieces of silcrete
consume more energy of a given quantity of glowing embers,
slowing down the heating process and preventing higher
temperatures).
The temperature curves we measured during our experiments
(Fig. 2) may not precisely reﬂect the heating conditions of MSA heat
treatment. Temperatures in open ﬁres may be unpredictable and

difﬁcult to reproduce. The total length of the treatment, i.e., the
time the rock is held at maximum temperature for and the effective
heating and cooling speeds must also be expected to be functions of
the exact procedure used (amount of wood used, size of the piles of
embers, the place of the silcrete within the ﬁre). Fires may also be
maintained for longer, and silcrete may have been left in the ﬁre for
longer than necessary. Our experiments should therefore be understood as an indication of a possibly used technique and they
should highlight the tolerance of silcrete with regards to fast
heating rates.
The maximum temperatures measured during our experiments
using the Diepkloof plant species are similar to the heat treatment
temperatures published by Brown et al. (2009) and Wadley and
Prinsloo (2014), but our temperature ramps are signiﬁcantly
faster. Only one sample showed traces of overheating during our
experiments, strongly supporting the model of heat-induced
transformations in silcrete published by Schmidt et al. (2013).
Higher maximum temperatures and even faster temperature
ramps, as produced by A. erioloba wood, induced HINC-fractures in
some of the samples but no clear relation between volume and
overheating, as suggested by earlier works (Mercieca, 2000;

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

31

Figure 7. ATR-Infrared and Raman spectra of the tempering-residue. Quartz bands are labelled with Q. The left inset shows an enlarged view of the 3000e2800 and
1750e1250 cm1 spectral regions. (a) IR spectrum of experimentally reproduced tempering-residue from Heeria argentea resin. (b) IR spectrum of the residue on sample DRSc1. (c)
IR spectrum of the residue on sample DRS2676. Note the similarity of experimental and archaeological residues. (d) Reference IR spectrum acquired on a clean post-heating surface
of sample DRS2676. Note the absence of bands related to organic compounds in this spectrum. Raman spectra are presented in the right inset with a comparison between of the
experimental tempering-residue (e) and the residue on sample DRS2676 (f). Spectra not smoothed but vertically offset for clarity.

Mercieca and Hiscock, 2008; Schmidt, 2014), was observed during
our experiments. A possible explanation for this would be that
impurities and inclusions in silcrete (such as iron oxide-hydroxides
producing vapour pressure through OH loss) contribute to HINCfracturing alongside the known factors (H2O formation from
SiOH, [Schmidt, 2014]). Further studies on where heat-induced
failure occurs in silcrete will shed light on this hypothesis. One of
the most interesting observations made during our analyses is the
abundance of HINC-fractures on the archaeological material. This
high frequency of HINC-fractures on the Diepkloof lithics suggests
that MSA knappers accepted the risk of heat-induced failure as long
as the resulting fragments remained knappable. The HINCfracturing may even have some advantages during the reduction
of silcrete if breakages preferentially occur at discontinuities and
ﬂaws in the rock that would have caused fracture irregularities and
problems during knapping. As the remaining pieces of silcrete
resulting from heat-induced fracturing are well heat-treated and
remain perfectly knappable, overheating during heat treatment
may have been used as a sort of pre-selection for good-quality raw
material.
Future experiments using different parts of domestic ﬁres and
different amounts of embers should address important questions
like the reproducibility and variability of heat treatment in embers
or in a ﬁre.
4.3. The formation of a tempering-residue
We observed the formation of a black opaque temperingresidue during experimental heat treatment using the green
wood of four plant species reported in the charcoal record of the
Diepkloof HP layers (Cartwright, 2013). Of these four species,
H. argentea, and S. laevigata belong to the family Anacardeaceae for
which several studies have demonstrated the exudation of resins
and gums (McNair, 1930; Joel and Fahn, 1980; Farrell et al., 1991).

There are reports of gum production of Diospyros (Nussinovitch,
2009) and resin production has been described for Podocarpus
-Duhaut et al., 2013). When collecting the wood
elongates (Charrie
for this study, we observed resin exudations on the stems of the
wood of the S. laevigata and H. argentea. Several studies have also
reported gum and resin exudations for the genus Acacia (McNair,
1930; Lemenih et al., 2003; Pietarinen et al., 2004) and a black
tempering-residue also resulted from some of our experiments
with Acacia. We hypothesize that the tempering-residue found on
experimental and archaeological silcrete formed by distillation
during the combustion of the plant exudations. During this process,
the distillation residue comes into contact with the silcrete surface
that touches the hot embers from where the exudations originate,
forming a black tempering-residue that tightly adheres to the silcrete surface. Anoxic or partly anoxic conditions within a pile of
embers and an ash-cone at the base of a ﬁre may be a prerequisite
for the formation of such a tempering-residue because low levels of
oxygen prevent the exudations from completely combusting (most
of the available oxygen is used up in the zone of active combustion
at the pile's surface). Our spectroscopic and microscopic analyses
support this model of formation. The optical properties of the
tempering-residue on archaeological and experimental samples
and its structure, such as its speciﬁc low reﬂectance values, the
degassing pores and the ﬂow texture, indicate deposition as a hot
ﬂuid phase and are consistent with organic tar (Crelling et al.,
2006). Natural wood tar is a product of the pyrolysis or carbonization of wood exudations (Bunbury, 1923) as they can be produced during burning of green wood containing sufﬁcient
moisture. Our infrared data also support this interpretation: all
observed spectral features are consistent with organic tars produced by burning of green wood (Regert et al., 2003). Raman
spectroscopic data are also consistent with this interpretation
showing carbonecarbon bonds that are produced when organic
matter is transformed through pyrolysis at high temperature

32

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

(Tomasini et al., 2012). The presence of charcoal fragments (inertodetrinite [Taylor et al., 1998]) that are cemented within this
organic tar indicates that the tempering-residue formed in the
presence of ashes or embers. The differences observed in the
infrared spectra of experimentally produced and archaeological
tempering residues may be due to diagenesis. The region between
1750 cm1 and 1250 cm1 contains CeO and C]O absorption
bands. The broad bands that appear in this region of archaeological
residue spectra may result from diagenetically formed CO bonds.
These diffuse underlying absorptions mask weak bands in this region and make it difﬁcult to observe the sharp CO bands in the
spectra. This is what one would expect from oxidation during burial
and does not contradict the chemical similarity between experimental and archaeological residues.
Thus, our heat treatment experiments produced a surface residue structurally and chemically similar to the one observed on the
Diepkloof artefacts. Our analyses also indicate that the mechanism
of formation of this tempering-residue corresponds most likely to
the pyrolysis of plant exudations that come into contact with the
silcrete surface during heat treatment.

4.4. Tempering-residue, hafting material or post-depositional
processes?
In light of our ﬁndings that the black residue consists of an
organic tar formed by contact between silcrete and hot embers of a
ﬁre, it must be discussed whether such a residue may also form
during post-depositional processes or unintentional discard in a
ﬁre. It must further be discussed whether a residue of a material
used for hafting of stone tools, possibly chemically similar to a
tempering-residue, may be mistaken for a tempering-residue. The
strict association of tempering-residues with a speciﬁc family of
surfaces on the artefacts appears to be the key element in clarifying
these issues.
If the residue were produced through post-depositional processes or unintentional discard in a ﬁre, we would expect that the
entire outer surface of the artefacts exposed to the ﬁre or the
taphonomic agent would be covered by tar. In contrast to this, the
wood tar observed on Diepkloof artefacts is only found on surfaces
that already existed before heat treatment (i.e., removal scars
predating heat treatment and naturally rolled/weathered surfaces).
It is not observed on surfaces created by knapping after heat
treatment. Furthermore, the archaeological tar is cross-cut by
adjacent post-heating ﬂake removal scars. This demonstrates that
the Diepkloof tar formed prior to the ﬁnal sequence of post-heattreatment-knapping, suggesting that it formed during the same
ratoire as heat treatment itself. Thus, the
stage of the chaîne ope
observed Diepkloof tempering-residue cannot have formed by
post-depositional processes after discard of the ﬁnished stone
tools.
The Diepkloof wood tar is obviously not related to hafting
because hafting materials would also not be cross-cut by ﬂake scars
since such materials are applied to the lithics after the tools are
ﬁnished. Additionally, most hafting materials would cover both
-Duhaut et al., 2013).
ventral and dorsal sides of an artefact (Charrie
Hafting materials that were reported from Diepkloof Rock Shelter
also show different composition and structure than the observed
tempering-residue. Although containing a substantial amount of
plant resin, Diepkloof hafting materials contain fragmented bone
and quartz grains and were not subjected to high temperatures
-Duhaut et al., 2013), in contrast to the tempering residue
(Charrie
that consists of plant exudations transformed to tar at high temperatures and that contains only micrometre-sized fragments of
charcoal.

4.5. Similarities between experimental and archaeological heat
treatment
Although we cannot conﬁrm that the procedure used during the
MSA was identical to the one we tested during our experiments,
both procedures must have been similar in two regards: [1] Direct
heating in embers: the direct contact between a silcrete surface and
hot embers of a ﬁre seems to be a prerequisite for the formation of
the observed archaeological tempering-residue. This makes the use
of an indirect heating method like heat treatment in ‘sand beneath
a ﬁre pit’ (Brown et al., 2009) an unlikely scenario. [2] Fast heating
rates: an additional argument for the similarity between archaeological and experimental procedures comes from the observation
that both the experimental and archaeological silcrete artefacts
exhibit similar heat-induced non-conchoidal fractures. During our
experiments, HINC-fractures developed in some of the samples that
endured heating rates of 8  C/minute to 20  C/minute. Indirect
heating in a sand-bath produces signiﬁcantly slower heating rates
in the range of 0.4  C/minute to 0.9  C/minute (Eriksen, 1997)
making HINC-fractures less likely (Mercieca, 2000; Mercieca and
Hiscock, 2008; Schmidt, 2014; Wadley and Prinsloo, 2014). The
presence of HINC-fractures on 7.2% (Frans) and 10.5% (Frank) of the
analysed Diepkloof artefacts is therefore a supplementary argument for the use of a heat treatment procedure that involved
heating rates similar to the ones in our experiments.
Based on the results of our experimental and archaeological
study, we conclude that the Diepkloof HP artefacts were heattreated using a technique that involved rather fast heating and
direct contact between the exposed silcrete surfaces and hot
glowing embers of a ﬁre. Even though indirect underground
heating may theoretically also produce HINC-fracturing during the
heating process, and one may argue that resin/gum containing
plant material intermixed with sediment may theoretically produce wood tar during underground heating, we must await
experimental and archaeological proof for the possible use of sandbath heating before drawing a deﬁnitive conclusion. However, until
such proof will be brought forward, our heat-treatment-in-embers
model appears to remain the best explanation of the archaeological
data at Diepkloof.

4.6. Comparison of our data with previously published data
Using an experimental approach, Wadley and Prinsloo (2014)
recently investigated the question of whether silcrete from South
Africa could have been heat-treated using the glowing embers of a
ﬁre as predicted (Schmidt et al., 2013). In their study, they reached
the conclusion that heat treatment in a bed of embers or using an
open ﬁre was not possible because three out of their six samples
heated to 521e573  C in a bed of embers and all three of their
samples heated to 762  C in a ﬁre fractured. This article is not the
place for a detailed comment on the work of Wadley and Prinsloo
(2014) and we would only like to highlight that our analysis of
the archaeological material from Diepkloof does not conﬁrm their
main hypothesis.
While we fully support their statement that heat treatment
“requires skilled use of ﬁre” (Wadley and Prinsloo, 2014: 49) and
agree that heat treatment may be indicative of “complex cognition”
(Op. cit.), our results suggest that the HP inhabitants of Diepkloof
did heat-treat silcrete in hot glowing embers. Furthermore, the
MSA knappers accepted the risk of heat-induced fracturing and
continued to knap the remaining fragments when such fracturing
occurred. Thus heat-induced fracturing during heat treatment
cannot be interpreted as failure of the procedure but must be understood as recurrent part of the lithic reduction sequence.

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

4.7. Conclusion and implications for the South African MSA
Heat treatment of silcrete marks a precocious and signiﬁcant
innovation within the South African Middle Stone Age that may
reveal some of the key aspects of the techno-economic system of
the MSA hunter-gatherers. While heat treatment alone is a significant technological innovation, it is crucial to fully understand its
role and place within the lithic production sequence, the motivations for performing it, and the technical process used for it. Our
study sheds light on the heat treatment procedure, raising important questions about the investment and complexity of the technical process (i.e., requiring more or less steps for its realization). It
appears most likely that heat treatment of silcrete, as it was performed during the South African MSA, did not involve indirect
heating in a sand-bath that would have demanded extra resources
or investment in time as previously suggested (Brown et al., 2009;
Brown and Marean, 2010; Wadley, 2013; Wadley and Prinsloo,
2014). In fact, the heat treatment procedure suggested by our
data could have been conducted alongside other daily, ﬁre-related
activities, allowing for a highly efﬁcient production of wellworkable raw materials for stone tool knapping, without interrupting or greatly slowing down the reduction sequence. Further
studies of silcrete and the tempering residue will help to contextualize heat treatment within the South African MSA technoeconomic system and in the broader suite of innovations that
appeared during this period. The complete chemical characterization of the heating-residue, using an appropriate set of analytical
techniques, is also currently in progress and will be subject of
another publication in the near future.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for
funding of the research project ‘Heat Treatment in the South African MSA’ that made the present study possible (Grant Nr: CO 226/
25-1, MI 1748/2-1, NI 299/25-1) and for funding the Agilent Cary
660 spectrometer used for parts of this study (MI 1748/1-1). We
thank the French Ministry of Foreign affairs for funding the excavation at Diepkloof, Heritage Western Cape for authorizing these
excavations and the South African Heritage Resources Agency for
the permit for analysis. We also acknowledge the University of Cape
Town for housing the DRS collections and logistic assistance during
this study. Special thanks goes to Justin Pargeter for helping us with
weighing of the samples and Jessica Plasket for her help during
silcrete sampling in the West Coast. We also acknowledge Royden
Wood and his staff for providing the facilities for experimental heat
treatment.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2015.05.001
References
Backwell, L., d'Errico, F., Wadley, L., 2008. Middle Stone Age bone tools from the
Howiesons Poort layers, Sibudu Cave, South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35,
1566e1580.
Brown, K., Marean, C., 2010. Wood fuel availability for heat treatment drives the rise
and fall of silcrete as a raw material in the Middle Stone Age of South Africa,
Asbstracts of the PaleoAnthropology Society 2010 Meetings. PaleoAnthropology
A0001eA0040.
Brown, K.S., Marean, C.W., Herries, A.I.R., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Braun, D.,
Roberts, D.L., Meyer, M.C., Bernatchez, J., 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of
early modern humans. Science 325, 859e862.
Bunbury, H.M., 1923. The Destructive Distillation of Wood. Benn Brothers, London.

33

Cartwright, C., 2013. Identifying the woody resources of Diepkloof Rock Shelter
(South Africa) using scanning electron microscopy of the MSA wood charcoal
assemblages. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 3463e3474.
-Duhaut, A., Porraz, G., Cartwright, C., De Araujo, M., Conan, J.,
Charrie
Poggenpoel, C., Texier, P.-J., 2013. First molecular identiﬁcation of a hafting
adhesive in the Late Howiesons Poort at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape,
South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 3506e3518.
Clark, J.D., 1988. The Middle Stone Age of East Africa and the beginnings of regional
identity. J. World Prehist. 2, 235e305.
Crabtree, D.E., Butler, B.R., 1964. Notes on experiment in ﬂint knapping: 1 heat
treatment of silica materials. Tebiwa 7, 1e6.
Crelling, J., Glikson, M., Huggett, W., Borrego, A.G., Hower, J., Ligouis, B.,
Mastalerz, M., Misz, M., Su
arez-Ruiz, I., Valentim, B., 2006. International Committee for Coal and Organic Petrology (ICCP), Atlas of anthropogenic particles.
Geological Survey Open-File Study 06e01, Indiana.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., 1992. Effect of heat treatment on siliceous rocks used in
prehistoric lithic technology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 19, 601e614.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., Boland, J., 1994. Mechanical properties of stone artefact
materials and the effect of heat treatment. Archaeometry 36, 177e208.
Eriksen, B.V., 1997. Implications of thermal pre-treatment of chert in the German
Mesolithic. In: Schild, R., Sulgostowska, Z. (Eds.), Man and Flint, Proceedings of
the VII International Flint Symposium Warszawa-Ostrowiec Swietokrzyski,
September 1995. Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw, pp. 325e329.
Farrell, B.D., Dussourd, D.E., Mitter, C., 1991. Escalation of plant defense: do latex and
resin canals spur plant diversiﬁcation? Am. Nat. 138, 881e900.
Henshilwood, C.S., D'Errico, F., Marean, C.W., Milo, R.G., Yates, R., 2001. An early
bone tool industry from the Middle Stone Age at Blombos Cave, South Africa:
implications for the origins of modern human behaviour, symbolism and language. J. Hum. Evol. 41, 631e678.
Henshilwood, C.S., d'Errico, F., Yates, R., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Duller, G.A.T.,
Mercier, N., Sealy, J.C., Valladas, H., Watts, I., Wintle, A.G., 2002. Emergence of
modern human behavior: Middle Stone Age engravings from South Africa.
Science 295, 1278e1280.
Henshilwood, C.S., d'Errico, F., Watts, I., 2009. Engraved ochres from the Middle
Stone Age levels at Blombos Cave, South Africa. J. Hum. Evol. 57, 27e47.
Inizan, M.L., Roche, H., Tixier, J., 1976. Avantages d'un traitement thermique pour la
taille des roches siliceuses. Quaternaria Roma 19, 1e18.
Joel, D.M., Fahn, A., 1980. Ultrastructure of the resin ducts of Mangifera indica L.
(Anacardiaceae). 1. Differentiation and senescence of the shoot ducts. Ann. Bot.
46, 225e233.
Lemenih, M., Abebe, T., Olsson, M., 2003. Gum and resin resources from some
Acacia, Boswellia and Commiphora species and their economic contributions in
Liban, south-east Ethiopia. J. Arid Environ. 55, 465e482.
McBrearty, S., Brooks, A.S., 2000. The revolution that wasn't: a new interpretation of
the origin of modern human behavior. J. Hum. Evol. 39, 453e563.
McNair, J.B., 1930. Gum, tannin, and resin in relation to speciﬁcity, environment, and
function. Am. J. Bot. 17, 187e196.
Mercieca, A., 2000. An experimental study of heat fracturing in silcrete. Aust.
Archaeol. 51, 40e47.
Mercieca, A., Hiscock, P., 2008. Experimental insights into alternative strategies of
lithic heat treatment. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35, 2634e2639.
Micheelsen, H., 1966. The structure of dark ﬂint from Stevns, Denmark. Medd.
Dansk. Geol. Foren. 16, 285e368.
Mourre, V., Villa, P., Henshilwood, C.S., 2010. Early use of pressure ﬂaking on lithic
artifacts at Blombos Cave, South Africa. Science 330, 659e662.
Nussinovitch, A., 2009. Plant Gum Exudates of the World: Sources, Distribution,
Properties, and Applications. CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton.
Olausson, D.S., Larsson, L., 1982. Testing for the presence of thermal pretreatment of
ﬂint in the Mesolithic and Neolithic of Sweden. J. Archaeol. Sci. 9, 275e285.
Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.-P., Poggenpoel, C., Porraz, G., Texier, P.-J., 2013. Introduction
to the project and excavation of Diepkloof Rock Shelter (Western Cape, South
Africa): a view on the Middle Stone Age. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 3369e3375.
Pietarinen, S., Willfor, S., Holmbom, B., 2004. Wood Resin 8 in Acacia mangium
and Acacia crassicarpa Wood and Knots. Appita Journal: Journal of the Technical Association of the Australian and New Zealand Pulp and Paper Industry
57, 146.
Porraz, G., Texier, P.-J., Archer, W., Piboule, M., Rigaud, J.-P., Tribolo, C., 2013. Technological successions in the Middle Stone Age sequence of Diepkloof Rock
Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa. J. Archaeol. Sci. 40, 3376e3400.
Purdy, B.A., Brooks, H.K., 1971. Thermal alteration of silica minerals: an archeological approach. Science 173, 322e325.
, C., Rolando, C., 2003. Structural
Regert, M., Garnier, N., Decavallas, O., Cren-Olive
characterization of lipid constituents from natural substances preserved in
archaeological environments. Meas. Sci. Technol. 14, 1620e1630.
Schindler, D.L., Hatch, J.W., Hay, C.A., Bradt, R.C., 1982. Aboriginal thermal alteration
of a Central Pennsylvania Jasper: analytical and behavioral implications. Am.
Antiq. 47, 526e544.
res Premie
res Lithiques : Que
Schmidt, P., 2013. Le Traitement Thermique des Matie
se Passe-t-il Lors de la Chauffe ? BAR International Series 2470 Archaeopress,
Oxford.
Schmidt, P., 2014. What causes failure (overheating) during lithic heat treatment?
Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 6, 107e112.
Schmidt, P., Masse, S., Laurent, G., Slodczyk, A., Le Bourhis, E., Perrenoud, C.,
€hlich, F., 2012. Crystallographic and structural transformations of
Livage, J., Fro

34

P. Schmidt et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 85 (2015) 22e34

sedimentary chalcedony in ﬂint upon heat treatment. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39,
135e144.
Schmidt, P., Porraz, G., Slodczyk, A., Bellot-gurlet, L., Archer, W., Miller, C.E., 2013.
Heat treatment in the South African Middle Stone Age: temperature induced
transformations of silcrete and their technological implications. J. Archaeol. Sci.
40, 3519e3531.
Taylor, G.H., Teichmüller, D.A., Diessel, C.F.K., Littke, R., Robert, P., 1998. Organic
Petrology. Gerbrüder Borntraeger, Berlin.
Texier, P.-J., Porraz, G., Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.-P., Poggenpoel, C., Tribolo, C., 2013.
The context, form and signiﬁcance of the MSA engraved ostrich eggshell
collection from Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Western Cape, South Africa. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 40, 3412e3431.

histoire de la pierre taille
e. I
Tixier, J., Inizan, M.-L., Roche, H., Dauvois, M., 1980. Pre
historiques,
Terminologie et technologie. Cercle de Recherches et d'Etudes Pre
Antibes.
Tomasini, E.P., Halac, E.B., Reinoso, M., Di Liscia, E.J., Maier, M.S., 2012. Micro-Raman
spectroscopy of carbon-based black pigments. J. Raman Spectrosc. 43,
1671e1675.
Wadley, L., 2010. Compound-adhesive manufacture as a behavioral proxy for
complex cognition in the Middle Stone Age. Curr. Anthropol. 51, 111e119.
Wadley, L., 2013. Recognizing complex cognition through innovative technology in
Stone Age and Palaeolithic Sites. Cambridge Archaeol. J. 23, 163e183.
Wadley, L., Prinsloo, L.C., 2014. Experimental heat treatment of silcrete implies
analogical reasoning in the Middle Stone Age. J. Hum. Evol. 70, 49e60.

