Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Anthropic activity markers and spatial variability: an
ethnoarchaeological experiment in a domestic unit of Northern
Gujarat (India)
Bernardo Rondelli a, *, Carla Lancelotti a, b, Marco Madella a, c, Alessandra Pecci d,
Andrea Balbo a, Javier Ruiz Pérez e, Fernanda Inserra d, Charusmita Gadekar f,
Miquel Ángel Cau Ontiveros c, d, P. Ajithprasad f
a

Complexity and Socio-Ecological Dynamics (CaSEs), Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, Institució Milà i Fontanals, Spanish National Research
Council (CSIC), C/Egipciaques 15, 08001 Barcelona, Spain
b
Department of Information and Communication Technologies, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
c
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain
d
Equip de Recerca Arqueològica i Arqueomètrica, University of Barcelona (ERAAUB), Barcelona, Spain
e
Facultat de Geograﬁa i Història, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
f
Department of Ancient History and Archaeology, MS University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat, India

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 15 November 2012
Received in revised form
6 September 2013
Accepted 11 September 2013

Spatio-temporal understanding of past domestic activities is a key aspect of archaeological reasoning. The
identiﬁcation of markers of particular anthropic actions through time has become a fundamental issue.
Chemical analyses of archaeological ﬂoors are an essential tool to investigate and identify anthropic
markers of past human activities. This paper explores the relative spatial variability of chemical residues
of ﬂoors in an ethnographic context to provide a constructive basis to experiment with spatial analysis for
the detection and interpretation of anthropic activity markers. These markers are recognised as anomalies and tendencies in the relative spatial distribution of chemical residues embedded in the ﬂoor. The
experiment has been carried out in a controlled environment and serves to test the methods and assumptions to be used in archaeological contexts. Spatial interpolations (IDW, Map Algebra and PCA) were
performed and allowed the identiﬁcation of anomalies in the distribution of residues that can be associated with speciﬁc activities (fuel use, food preparation and consumption, use of ﬁreplaces). Geostatistics
(Ordinary and Regression Kriging) was used in order to contribute to the identiﬁcation of trends related
to the use of space and the connected activities (e.g. inner versus outer space, storage versus cooking).
The results show how the integration of different techniques can improve data interpretation.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Anthropic markers
Ethnoarchaeology
Spatial interpolation
Geostatistics
Chemical residues
Spot tests
ICP-AES

1. Introduction
This paper shows the potential for the detection and interpretation of anthropic activity markers by using spatial interpolations
to explore the relative variability of ﬂoor chemical residues within a
controlled ethnographical context in Northern Gujarat (India). The
work illustrates different techniques for spatial interpolation and
analysis, discusses their potential and limitations and provides an
example of how these can be combined in order to detect relative

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 934423489.
E-mail addresses: bernardo.rondelli@imf.csic.es, bernardorondelli@yahoo.it,
bernardorondelli@gmail.com (B. Rondelli).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.09.008

patterns in the distribution of chemical residues. This exercise was
carried out within a long-term research perspective on the significance and development of anthropic activity markers at domestic,
settlement and landscape level (French et al., 2009; Lancelotti,
2010; Lancelotti and Madella, 2012; Sulas and Madella, 2012). The
concept of anthropic markers was initially used in pollen and soil
micro-charcoal studies to deﬁne changes in vegetation composition
due to human activities (intentional forest ﬁres, agriculture, etc.;
see for example Moore et al., 1991: 189e191). Disciplines such as
linguistics, biology or chemistry have also thoroughly developed a
deﬁnition of ‘marker’. However, this notion is still used uncritically
in archaeological contexts and needs further development, both in
terms of reference libraries and identiﬁcation protocols, before it
can be routinely used. The difﬁculty in deﬁning this concept within

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

archaeology can be related to the complexity of human behaviour
and the wide spectrum of possible signatures resulting from the
same action (including the possibility of equiﬁnality).
People tend to recurrently use speciﬁc areas of their living space
(or of the landscape) for certain activities and even when the same
activity is carried out in more than one location, this rarely occurs
as a single episode (Barba, 1986, 2007; Ortiz and Barba, 1993).
Indeed, this enduring use of space produces an accumulation of
residues (chemical and/or physical) in the deposit, which represent
the result of the activity that produced them. The accumulation of
the same residue(s) within an area allows the detection of differential spatial concentration(s) of particular residue(s). Ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology (Barba and Ortiz, 1992;
Middleton, 1996; Pecci, 2003; Pecci et al., 2013) drive the inferential
reasoning that creates the model(s) connecting the concentration
of particular residues (proxies) with a speciﬁc activity. We deﬁne
this/these model(s) as ‘anthropic activity marker’.
It can be argued that many factors, others than activities, can
affect the chemical composition of a spatial feature such as a ﬂoor.
Indeed, the same material used to plaster the ﬂoors has its own
chemical signature and, similarly, processes of ﬂoor maintenance
can inﬂuence the chemical/physical signatures. However, we assume that all these can be considered as a background “noise” value
that can therefore be discounted (see Barba, 2007: 441) and that the
activities carry out “on top” of this noise will be the ones creating a
real difference (these points will be discussed in more detail below).
Chemical analyses of archaeological ﬂoors have been a primary
tool to investigate and identify past human domestic activities.
Solid, liquid or semi-liquid substances released during a speciﬁc
activity are incorporated or absorbed in the ﬂoors and they can be
extracted and analysed (Barba, 1986, 2007). Research into this has
been carried out in different parts of the world involving the study
of different archaeological and ethnoarchaeological contexts, from
single rooms and buildings to entire regions (for an updated review
see Middleton et al., 2010; Pecci et al., 2013; Salisbury, 2013; Vyncke
et al., 2011; Wells and Moreno Cortés, 2010; Wilson et al., 2009).
Ethnographic contexts offer privileged settings to the study of

483

anthropic markers of domestic activities as they allow for the
possibility of correlating chemical residues with witnessed activities. This important link is achieved through direct observations
and non-structured interviews to the people living in the domestic
compound. Ethnographical contexts offer the chance of experimenting with data in a controlled environment, providing an
important support to archaeological theory building (see for
example Boivin, 2000; Lancelotti and Madella, 2012; Milek, 2012)
and increasing our understanding of temporal rhythms and spatiotemporal uncertainty. Throughout this paper we use the word
‘experiment’ and the concept of ‘experimenting with data’ not in the
traditional sense of experimental archaeology as an “imitative
experiment to replicate past phenomena” (Mathieu, 2002: 12) but
in the sense of a test under controlled conditions to provide evidence for or against a hypothesis. Spatial interpolation of chemical
values is a common method in archaeology for extrapolating
spatially continuous variables from discreet point samples. However, spatial techniques detecting chemical differential concentrations did not entertain critical reﬂexions on their limitations,
advantages and comparative usefulness (Dore and López Varela,
2010; Fernandez et al., 2002; Middleton et al., 2010; Pecci et al.,
2013; Salisbury, 2013; Terry et al., 2004; Vyncke et al., 2011;
Wells, 2010).
The present research was developed within a domestic compound in North Gujarat (India) with the speciﬁc aim of improving
the archaeological reasoning and interpretation of past domestic
activities in the Indus Civilisation. During the 3rd millennium BC
North Gujarat was occupied by settlements pertaining to the Indus
Civilisation and witnessed the emergence of urban sites with
fortiﬁcation walls and clear urban planning (Kenoyer, 1991, 1998;
Possehl, 2002). Within these sites many domestic structures have
been identiﬁed and ‘ﬂoors’ detected by the archaeologists. The
presence of complex domestic structures drives the question of
how the space was used in them. The ancient ‘ﬂoors’ are often
thought to have been constructed using techniques that are
currently employed in traditional Indian villages (involving the use
of a mixture of sand, clay, dung and water). Qualitative description

Fig. 1. Location of Jandhala in Northern Gujarat (India) with satellite imagery showing (a) the village and (b) the studied compound (b) (SPOT Imagery acquired on May 2009 and
retrieved on September 2012 from Google Earth, Copyright 2012).

484

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

and analogical reasoning have already been used to relate this
modern technique to the archaeological evidence (see for example
Boivin, 2001). However, a quantitative approach considering correlations between past and present records has rarely been applied
(Lancelotti, 2010; Lancelotti and Madella, 2012).
2. Materials and methods
2.1. A domestic compound in Northern Gujarat (India): interviews,
mapping and ﬂoor/lifecycle
The present research was carried out in a domestic compound in
Jandhala, a village in the Patan district of North Gujarat, India
(Fig. 1). This region is characterised by the Indian monsoon and
precipitations typical of semi-arid climates. The compound is a
non-mechanized farmer’s residence, built after the 2001 Gujarat
earthquake using local materials and traditional techniques (wattle-and-daub, cow dung plastering, wood and other plant materials). The domestic compound belongs to two brothers who live in
two separate houses and share the same courtyard where animals
are kept, and where activities (plant processing, charcoal production, etc.) take place (Fig. 2). The two houses have similar layouts: a
semi-open space on the front (veranda) and an inner space, which is
composed of a single rectangular room with or without partial
internal separation. A partially collapsed structure, adjacent to one

of the houses (House A), represents the remains of a dwelling in use
before the 2001 earthquake.
For the present work, we limit the analysis and discussion to one
of the compound’s houses (House A in Fig. 2). This structure was
visited by the NoGAP team in October 2009 and November 2010
(Madella et al., 2010). During both visits a topographical survey was
carried out using a total station, and photogrammetry was performed using a digital camera mounted on a telescopic pole. The
entire compound and the interior of House A have been registered
and vectorized in a GIS environment (Figs. 2 and 3). Furthermore,
unstructured interviews were conducted with the two senior
members (wife and husband) of the family living in the house. The
interviews focused on the types and cycles of activities carried out
in the compound, as well as their spatial distribution within the
courtyard, veranda and inner house. Speciﬁc attention was given to
obtaining information on the construction and maintenance of the
ﬂoors. Floors (as well as walls) are built using diverse proportions of
sand, clay, cow/buffalo dung and water. The materials used to
prepare the ﬂoor plaster are all local: the dung is collected from the
village animals that graze around the house; the inorganic
component is sourced from nearby locations and it is composed of
clay and some kankar (caliche). The house foundations are made of
a level composed mainly of small carbonatic gravel and sand,
heavily rammed; the main ﬂoor plaster is then laid on top of the
foundations with a thickness of about 2 cm. Thinner (millimetric)

Fig. 2. Topographical map of the investigated compound of Jandhala highlighting House A. The legend includes the main structures and features recorded in November 2010.

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

485

Fig. 3. Detail of the House A with the recorded (1) domestic features and (2) main activities. On the top photos of (a) the entrance with the verandah, (b) the external ﬁreplace (c)
one of the internal ﬁreplaces.

486

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

re-plastering episodes of the entire ﬂoor take place on average four
times a year together with ad-hoc re-plastering whenever the ﬂoor
is damaged. In those years when ﬂoors do not need much maintenance, they are still re-plastered at least once, always following
the end of the monsoon and before diwali (the festival of lights,
celebrated between mid-October and mid-December according to
the lunar calendar). Contrary to observations made by Boivin
(2000, 2001) in Rajasthan, the mixture of ingredients used for replastering in Jandhala does not vary according to yearly festivities
or speciﬁc family pujas (religious rituals performed in Hinduism as
an offering to deities, distinguished persons, or special guests).
Normally the new layer of plaster is applied directly on top of the
pre-existing one. However, occasionally when parts of the ﬂoor
suffered major damage the loose layers are scraped away and the
holes ﬁlled.
Micromorphology was carried out in order to observe the
stratigraphical sequence of the ﬂoor construction and to evaluate
the signiﬁcance of the sampling strategy in terms of the temporal
representativeness of the samples. Micromorphological ﬂoor
samples were recovered from the adjacent derelict house to
minimise damage to the inhabited house. Interviews provided evidence that similar ﬂoor building practices were utilised in both
House A and the adjacent derelict house. Understanding the cycles
of ﬂoor maintenance through interviews and micromorphology
was paramount to evaluate the signiﬁcance of the results obtained
from the geochemical analysis. The thin section of the ﬂoor showed
a layered structure with sharp boundaries between the microlayers, which represent the consecutive plastering events. Interference colours observed between the micro-layers are due to the
accumulation of fragments of plant parenchymatous tissues (Stolt
and Lindbo, 2010). This suggests that each level was exposed for a
certain amount of time, allowing for the accumulation of plant
remains on the surface, in accordance with information gathered
from interviews. Each micro-layer marks the temporal cycle (3e12
months) during which activities were carried out on the ﬂoor
surface and physical/chemical residues were incorporated.
It was decided that the samples for this study were to be taken
across all the top micro-layers representing the accumulation of
several plastering and temporal cycles, which may include one or
more activities in each cycle. The study of the use of space based on
ﬂoor chemical analysis has relied on the concept that identiﬁed
residues are the sum of different activities (or a single activity)
carried out in a speciﬁc part of the space (Barba, 1986, 2007; Barba
and Ortiz, 1992; Middleton et al., 2010; Pecci et al. 2013; Sherman
2011). Hence, the samples in this study represent the sum of cycles of use, and therefore the chemical signatures obtained are
average indicators of all the residues that fell on the ﬂoor over the
period of time between the foundation of the house and the
moment of sampling. On the basis of the interviews, the accumulation of residues corresponded to a total time of about 10 years.
2.2. Floor chemical residues: chemical elements, phosphates and
proteins
Depending on the aims of the study, the available resources, and
the scale of the area to be investigated, different sampling strategies may be chosen (Wells, 2010). The interior of House A (Fig. 3)
was sampled following a rectangular lattice of 100 cm. Samples
were collected with a hollow metal pipe with a diameter of 5 cm,
penetrating into the upper layers of the ﬂoor up to a depth of 2 cm,
which included all micro-layers of occupation laid above the ﬂoor
foundation. A total of 70 samples were collected and analysed.
All samples were ground to ﬁne powder with an agate mortar,
quartered and divided into two sub-samples: one for spot-test and
one for multielement analysis with Inductively Coupled Plasma-

Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES). The two techniques are
complementary thus maximising the recovered information
(Middleton et al., 2010):
 Spot tests allow for the analysis of a large number of samples.
They provide semi-quantitative data indicative of activity areas
likely to be affected by organic compounds (see Barba, 2007).
 ICP-AES provides quantitative data on chemical elements,
including those elements that cannot be identiﬁed with spot
tests.
Samples for spot test were treated and assessed for the identiﬁcation of phosphates, fatty acids and protein residues according to
the methodology proposed by Barba (2007: 442e443). Phosphates
were assessed by colour intensity on ﬁlter paper. Fatty acids were
evaluated by differences in quantity and stability of soapy foam.
Protein residues were assessed by the colour intensity of ammonia
vapour on pH-indicator strips. The second batch of sub-samples
was sent to ALS Laboratory Group in Seville (Spain), where they
were pre-treated with aqua-regia digestion for ICP-AES to measure
the concentration of 35 main elements. Elements with values
below the reliable instrument detection limits (IDL) were excluded
(samples values and analyses are presented in the Supplementary
data e Annex 1).
2.3. Statistics and spatial analyses: assessing variability and
comparing techniques
Statistical tools are necessary for choosing which spatial interpolation and prediction to apply (see for instance the decision
making ﬂowchart in Figure 2.3 in Hengl, 2009). In this research,
basic exploratory and descriptive statistics were performed on
Log10 transformed data. A logarithmic scale reduces wide-ranging
quantities to smaller scopes and, in this case, eliminated the differences in scale between values. Correlation between values was
performed using the Spearman’s bivariate correlation test for nonnormally distributed data (Annex 2). ANOVA tests were used to
compare means and to detect patterns and similarities between
samples. Although the analyses were run on a mix of normally and
non-normally distributed data, ANOVA has been preferred to the
KruskaleWallis test as it is more robust to the violation of its assumptions (Field, 2005: 542). All statistical analyses were performed with PAWS statistic 18, version 1.1, developed by the Data
Theory Scaling System Group of the University of Leiden in the
Netherlands.
Deterministic methods for spatial interpolation are particularly
useful when there is no autocorrelation between the spatially
distributed values (e.g. Inverse Distance Weighting based on the
extent of similarity, and Radial Basis Functions based on the degree
of smoothing). However, geostatistics interpolation has proved to
be a more efﬁcient technique where values are highly correlated
(for exhaustive literature see Hengl, 2009). In the current case study
both deterministic and geostatistic techniques are used. Inverse
Distance Weighting (IDW) has been applied to ICP-AES values. The
resulting grids have been investigated with principal component
analyses (PCA e Annex 3 for eigenvalues) and map algebra
(Salisbury, 2012, 2013) following a series of elemental combinations discussed in Middleton (1996), Milek (2007: 338e339),
Lancelotti (2010) and Lancelotti and Madella (2012). IDW, Ordinary
Kriging (OK) and Regression Kriging (RK) (Webster and Oliver,
2007; Minasny and McBratney, 2007; Sherman, 2011; Cressie and
Wikle, 2011) have been applied to spot-test values (fatty acids,
proteins and phosphates). For OK we explored exponential,
Gaussian, linear and logarithmic semivariogram models, while a
linear regression model was used for RK with generalized least

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

squares (GLS) for estimating the unknown parameters in the linear
regression. GLS was preferred over ordinary least square (OLS)
because of the spatial correlation between residuals (Hengl, 2009;
Hengl et al., 2004, 2007). A detailed description of the implemented
procedure can be found in Hengl et al. (2007: 27e50). Spatial interpolations and geostatistics were implemented with open source
software such as GRASS, SAGA GIS and R.
3. Results
3.1. Statistical analyses
Statistical tests on the results of multi-element ICP-AES analysis
have proved inconclusive in respect to the identiﬁcation of anthropic activity markers. Spearman’s correlation test has highlighted the presence of strong signiﬁcant correlations (p < 0.01)
between almost all chemical elements from the analysis (Fig. 4). It
was therefore not possible to extrapolate a signiﬁcant combination
of elements for this case study. Similarly, the ANOVA mean comparison highlighted the lack of variation between different areas of
the house (such as inner room versus veranda; Fig. 5a) or between
speciﬁc activity spaces (such as the area with ﬁreplaces versus the
area for food storage; Fig. 5b).
3.2. Spatial analyses
Regression Kriging proved a satisfactory method for deﬁning
trends such as the separation between inner and outer space (3.2.1)
and the identiﬁcation of use areas (storage and eating) within the
house, as conﬁrmed by the interviews (3.2.2). Principal Component
Analysis and Map Algebra performed with spatial grids elaborated
with Inverse Distance Weighting provided interesting results for
highlighting speciﬁc activities such as burning areas (ﬁreplaces)
and fuel use (3.2.3).
3.2.1. The house: inner versus outer space
The application of Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW), Ordinary
Kriging (OK) and Regression Kriging (RK) showed some differences
between the inside and the outside areas. All the distribution maps
of phosphates based on spot tests results (Fig. 6) pointed out a

487

higher concentration of phosphate in the veranda, probably due to
the presence of animal dejections and general dirt. This is a common pattern thought to be found in many archaeological and ethnoarchaeological buildings (Barba, 1986; Barba and Ortiz, 1992;
Pecci et al., 2010). However, in this case, we can appreciate that
the discriminant power of the representation depends on the
technique applied. The distribution maps of phosphate created
with IDW and OK (Fig. 6a and b), although closer to the real values
of the samples, do not show clear separation between areas. The RK
(Fig. 6c), on the other hand, distinctly display a neat separation
between the internal and external portions of the house. The
introduction of a regression model makes RK a more powerful tool
to highlight the differences in chemical input between the veranda
and the inner space, as opposed to a ’more realistic’ (closer to
sample values) approach using IDW or OK. In this sense the map
created using RK represents a distribution trend that is more
explicative and visually clearer than the maps created with the
other two techniques.
3.2.2. Floor ranking: repetitive use of space and activity/utility
domains
The representation power of RK becomes further evident when
it is compared with IDW and OK for fatty acids (Fig. 7) and protein
residues (Fig. 8) distributions, supported by interviews data and
survey information (Fig. 3). Although the IDW and OK show spatial
differences related to fats and proteins, it is the RK processing that
better represents the documented division of space as identiﬁed
through the survey and interviews. Indeed, it is possible to relate
the concentration trends of protein residues to the house storage
area and the concentration trends of the fatty acids residues to the
area mostly used for milk and food preparation (use of ghee e
clariﬁed butter e and vegetable oils).
3.2.3. Activities and ICP-AES values: burning areas and fuel use
Grid distribution of ICP-AES values using IDW are not signiﬁcant
per se of speciﬁc activities, but the combination of different grids
provided interesting results for highlighting the burning areas and
fuel use. Floor sediments have been explored following several
different combinations of elements discussed in published literature
(Fig. 9): a) deposited food remains (Ca, P, K, Mg, Sr); b) living room

Fig. 4. Correspondence analysis of chemical elements, showing strong signiﬁcant correlations (p < 0.01) between most of the analysed elements.

488

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

Fig. 5. Boxplots resulting from ANOVA analysis of log10 transformed values for all elements. There are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between the outer (verandah) and inner
areas (a) of the house or between different zones of the inner area (ﬁreplace vs storage) (b).

sediments (P þ K þ Mg) discussed in Milek (2007: 338e339); c)
enclosed spaces (Ca þ Sr); and d) burning areas (P þ K) discussed in
Middleton (1996: 679). This approach, despite a high degree of uncertainty, suggests a separation of the inner space in two activity
areas (food production and consumption vs. storage). However, a
separation between the veranda and the inner room is not detectable. Finally, a clear correlation is visible when we compare the
distribution of anomalies (lower and higher values) with the position of the three ﬁreplaces: the values for the ﬁreplace in the veranda
are clearly different from the two internal ﬁreplaces. The distribution maps (Fig. 10), based on the PCA of dung elements (Al, Ba, Ca, Co,
Cr, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb) and wood ash (Ca þ K þ Mg þ Al þ P) discussed
in Lancelotti and Madella (2012), show a high presence of dung in
the veranda ﬁreplace while the inner ﬁreplaces seem to be characterised by the presence of wood ash.
4. Discussion
The results of this controlled ethnoarchaeological study have
allowed critical and reﬂexive considerations about the archaeological methods used to identify anthropic activity markers, speciﬁcally those related to spatial interpolation based on the chemical
analyses of ﬂoors. These considerations should contribute in
developing:
a) The use of multi-proxy approaches (combination and comparison of data) for the identiﬁcation of domestic activities;
b) The use of geostatistics regression models for cyclical (multitemporal) trends;
c) The evaluation of uncertainty in archaeological interpretations.

4.1. A multi-layered approach to reference patterns
The identiﬁcation of anthropic activity markers through chemical ﬂoor analyses in a controlled ethnographic context allows archaeologists to move beyond the limitations of qualitative and
descriptive reasoning, and promotes the development of a multilayered approaches to building collections of reference patterns.
It is especially important in contexts such as the one here studied,
where traditional statistical methods do not seem adequate to
distinguish between different activity areas (see paragraph 3.1).
The downfalls of traditional correlation analyses between elements
are due to the speciﬁc preparation of the ﬂoor plaster. Indeed the
chemical composition of the plaster may be the cause of the high
correlation observed amongst all chemical elements. Where
traditional statistical studies do not provide clear results the
application of geostatistics can help tackle the problem, allowing
for the identiﬁcation of anthropic activity markers. Clear examples
from this study are the correlation between burning areas and fuel
use in the studied house, and the identiﬁcation of room divisions
(for the latter see next Section, 4.2). The interpolation of chemical
elements concentrations obtained with ICP-MS analyses, that in the
published literature are associated with food processing and
burning activities (Milek, 2007; Middleton, 1996), do not provide a
clear diversiﬁcation of activity areas within the house (Fig. 9). Only
the ﬁreplaces show distinctive signatures, which differ between the
internal ones and the veranda hearth. This divergence can be understood and interpreted through the interviews data: the veranda
cooking area, used mainly during the dry season, has a higher input
of dung while in the inner house cooking areas (which are used
mainly during the rainy season) wood is the primary source of fuel.

Fig. 6. Phosphates distribution maps: a) Inverse Distance Weighting with power parameter of 2; b) Ordinary Kriging elaboration as mean representation of the variogram models
with R2 > 0.7; c) Regression Kriging elaboration using generalized least squares (GLS). GLS is preferred because of the likely spatial correlation between residuals.

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

489

Fig. 7. Fatty acid distribution map: a) Inverse Distance Weighting with power parameter of 2; b) Ordinary Kriging elaboration as mean representation of the variogram models with
R2 > 0.7; c) Regression Kriging elaboration using GLS.

Moreover, the external ﬁreplace seems to be surrounded by values
that indicate a higher concentration of wood ash (Fig. 10). This is
consistent with the information collected during the interviews on
how fuel is arranged when the primary source is dung. In such cases
dung is placed in the very centre of the ﬁreplace (directly below the
pot) and kindled and refuelled by means of long sticks of wood that
normally stick out of the ﬁreplace (Fig. 11). This process results in an
accumulation of dung ash in the very centre of the structure and a
scatter of woody ash all around it, with a higher concentration at
the mouth of the ﬁreplace.
4.2. Regression models and trend detection
In archaeology, spatial interpolation of chemical signatures has
focused mainly on recognition of absolute (outliers between
different datasets) and/or relative anomalies (outliers within the
dataset), with less work done in modelling trends. Anomalies
recognition is the identiﬁcation of exceptional (non-average) values
(e.g. concentration), repetitively associated with speciﬁc activities
or structures (for example the burning areas and fuel use discussed
above). Trend modelling is the estimation of general tendencies in a
set of values that can highlight changes and it is mostly associated
with average values rather than exceptions. Both anomalies and
tendencies can be repetitively associated with a speciﬁc activity
and therefore they can create patterns.
While in geochemistry (Zhang et al., 2011) or soil studies
(Davidovic and Prolovi
c, 2010; Lark, 2012; White et al., 2012) spatial
interpolation has used geostatistics to estimate trends and predict
different probability distributions, in archaeology these techniques
have rarely been explored and they were applied only in a few
contexts and/or case studies. Examples of these applications are
related to surface artefact distribution (Markofsky and Bevan, 2011),
heterogeneity and non-stationarity in archaeological patterns
across the landscape (Bevan and Conolly, 2009), and to the validation of agent-based simulation results (Rubio Campillo et al., 2011).

In spite of its potential, geostatistic is still rarely used for the study of
chemical signatures distribution (Lloyd and Atkinson, 2004).
Geostatistical interpolations have the advantage of being
model-based, making it possible to estimate spatial correlations
between values rather than predicting values at missing locations.
Kriging is the most commonly used geostatistical technique for
modelling spatial dependency. Instead of weighting nearby data
points by a power of their inverted distance (as in the case of
deterministic approaches), Kriging relies on the spatial correlation
structure of the data to determine the weighting values. Kriging
techniques commonly used in soil studies include: Simple (SK),
Ordinary (OK), Universal (UK), with External Drift (KDE) and
Regression (RK) Kriging. SK assumes a predeﬁned constant trend in
the data; OK assumes an unknown constant trend; whereas UK/
KDE/RK assume a polynomial (non-constant) trend model, derived
from auxiliary predictors (UK and KDE) or with linear regression
(RK) and then kriges the regressed values. In this experiment we
have applied and compared results from OK and RK.
The results of this study suggest that Regression Kriging (RK) has
a great potential to represent temporal trends and has been
underestimated in the archaeological investigation of ﬂoor surfaces
(Figs. 6, 8 and 9). Results obtained from the application of RK
differentiated the use of space in our domestic unit, which correlated with information gathered from interviews and survey. By
using a polynomial regression (which is a mathematical approximation that more correctly models the presence of tendencies and
cycles in the studied spatial structure), rather than a constant trend
(such as in OK) or a weighted average (such as in IDW), the RK maps
highlighted the main distribution trends and removed redundant
variability. This outcome is particularly signiﬁcant because it correlates with the sampling assumption that each sample represented an accumulation of 10 years of activity. This means that the
maps elaborated through RK can be interpreted as showing the
temporal trends in the use of the space. These ﬁrst empirical results
need to be corroborated with additional ethnographic case studies

Fig. 8. Protein distribution map: a) Inverse Distance Weighting with power parameter of 2; b) Ordinary Kriging elaboration as mean representation of the variogram models with
R2 > 0.7; c) Regression Kriging elaboration using GLS.

490

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

Fig. 9. IDW interpolations a) for deposited food remains (Ca, P, K, Mg, Sr) and b) living room sediments (P þ K þ Mg) discussed in Milek (2007, 338e339), as well as c) enclosed
space (Ca þ Sr) and d) burning area (P þ K) discussed in Middleton (1996:679).

to further evaluate their signiﬁcance. However, our preliminary
interpretation is supported by Regression Kriging applications in
other contexts, such as in soil studies and geochemistry (Eldeiry
and Garcia, 2010; Zhu and Lin, 2010).

It is evident that by using RK alone, anomalies such as the
burning areas or the differences between internal/external use of
fuel would not be detected as these signatures are correlated with
speciﬁc areas/structures or single point values, not general trend.

Fig. 10. PCA elaboration combining signatures of wood ash after Milek (2007 e Ca þ K þ Mg þ Al þ P) and dung after Lancelotti and Madella (2102 e
Al þ Ba þ Ca þ Co þ Cr þ Fe þ Mn þ Mo þ Ni þ Pb þ P): a) internal ﬁreplace not in use; b) internal ﬁreplace in use; c) concentration of wood ash at the mouth of the external
ﬁreplace; d) and e) concentration of wood ash probably resulting from the cleaning of the internal ﬁreplaces; f) external ﬁreplace; g) high concentration of dung elements e this can
be explained by the position of food containers in these part of the room that prevented routine cleaning of the ﬂoor thus resulting in a stronger signal of the dung used fro
plastering.

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

491

processes that originated the archaeological record. The present
study is a ﬁrst step forward in this direction.
Acknowledgement

Fig. 11. A photo of the external ﬁreplace located in the veranda: wood is used to light
the dung used as fuel, and is the source of the wood ash that is indeed deposited
around the ﬁreplace structure.

Similarly, by only using the ‘more realistic’ (closer to sample values)
interpolations (IDW or OK with high accuracy) trend patterns in the
room use and activities (such as inner versus outer space and
storage versus cooking) would not be seen.
5. Conclusions
This paper has shown the application of diverse interpolation
techniques to detect spatial variability of ﬂoor chemical residues in
a domestic unit in Northern Gujarat, with the view of discussing
potentials and limits for the identiﬁcation of past human domestic
activity. The identiﬁcation of single events is archaeologically rarely
possible and archaeological interpretations are mainly based on the
detection of cumulative evidence of activities, and the connected
use of space. Repetition of the same activity in a speciﬁc area can
create spatial variability (concentrations or tendencies) of a residue(s). Ethnographic work is crucial in order to create reference
libraries and to calibrate the inferential reasoning linking the
spatial variability with the identiﬁed activity. In the ethnoarchaeological literature, spatial interpretations of the results of
one speciﬁc analysis of ﬂoor samples (e.g. phosphates) are generally
based on a single elaboration map resulting from the values of the
chemical components. The current experiment shows that the
same set of values can generate different maps (grids) depending
on the choice of spatial statistical technique. These can be interpreted in different ways. Therefore, the technique applied determines the output and, consequently, the interpretation of the
original data. It is thus argued here that the effort and resources
invested in sampling and laboratory analysis should be matched by
an equivalent effort in exploring the potential of different quantitative analysis and representation techniques. It is paramount that
the degree of uncertainty introduced by each method and the solutions that each technique can provide (or not) is taken into account. The study of uncertainty in archaeological investigation, as
in other research domains, is critical (see Bevan et al., 2013; Crema,
2012) and uncertainty cannot be endlessly considered a “constant”
in our domain, and therefore ignored as a systematic error
(Goovaerts, 2001). Although quantitative methods are still not
widely applied in archaeological research, archaeologists need to be
aware that exploring alternative scenarios in spatial modelling
can make the narrative scientiﬁcally more coherent and consistent,
and thus more useful. Furthermore, the power of analysis offered
by spatial interpolations opens the possibility to apply a multiproxy
approach for obtaining a more realistic identiﬁcation of the

We wish to thank the owners of the house who opened the
doors of their home and allowed us to sample (and damage) their
ﬂoor: Sakti-ji, Nema-ji, Puri, Sonal and Nita. Our gratitude goes to
Victoria Yannitto who provided part of the micromorphological
information, José Luis Mateos, Francesc Cecília, Núria Garcia and
Juan José García-Granero who helped with survey and sampling. BR
has worked on this research on a grant from the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation (SB2009-060) and on a contract from
SimulPast Consolider Ingenio Project (CSD2010-00034), CL on a
contract from AGRIWESTMED (ERC-2008 AdG 230561), AB on
contracts from JAEDoc-ESF (MICINN), CSD2010-00034 and JdC. The
NoGAP project research has been funded by the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation (HAR2010-16052) and by the Spanish
Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport (Proyectos Arqueológicos
en el Exterior). The spot tests were carried out as part of the activities of the ERAAUB research group (SGR2009-01173), in the
framework of the project PROFOLANT (PIEF-GA-2009-235863, IEFMC Actions) and the project LRCWMED (HAR2009-08290). We
acknowledge the useful comments from three anonymous
reviewers.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.09.008.
References
Barba, L., 1986. La química en el estudio de áreas de actividad. In: Manzanilla, L.
(Ed.), Unidades habitacionales mesoamericanas y sus áreas de actividad. UNAM,
Messico, pp. 21e39.
Barba, L., 2007. Chemical residues in lime-plastered archaeological ﬂoors. Geoarchaeology 22, 439e452.
Barba, L., Ortiz, A., 1992. Análisis químico de los pisos de ocupación: un caso
etnográﬁco en Tlaxcala, México. Lat. Am. Antiq. 3 (1), 63e82.
Bevan, A., Conolly, J., 2009. Modelling spatial heterogeneity and nonstationarity in
artifact-rich landscapes. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 956e964.
Bevan, A., Conolly, J., Hennig, C., Johnston, A., Quercia, A., Spencer, L., Vroom, J., 2013.
Measuring chronological uncertainty in intensive survey ﬁnds: a case study
from Antikythera, Greece. Archaeometry 55 (2), 312e328.
Boivin, N., 2000. Life rhythms and ﬂoor sequences: excavating time in rural
Rajasthan and Neolithic Çatalhöyük. World Archaeol. 31 (3), 367e388.
Boivin, N., 2001. “Archaeological Science as Anthropology”: Space, Time and Materiality in Rural India and the Ancient Past (Unpublished Ph.D. thesis). University of Cambridge.
Crema, E., 2012. Modelling temporal uncertainty in archaeological analysis.
J. Archaeol. Method Th. 19, 440e461.
Cressie, N., Wikle, C., 2011. Statistics for Spatio-Temporal Data. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., Hoboken.
Davidovi
c, N., Prolovi
c, V., 2010. Modeling of soil parameters spatial uncertainty by
geostatistics. Facta Univ. Ser. Archit. Civil Eng. 8, 111e118.
Dore, C., López Varela, S., 2010. Kaleidoscopes, palimpsests, and clay: realities and
complexities in human activities and soil chemical/residue analysis. J. Archaeol.
Method Th. 17, 279e302.
Eldeiry, A., Garcia, L., 2010. Comparison of ordinary kriging, regression kriging, and
cokriging techniques to estimate soil salinity using LANDSAT images. J. Irrig.
Drain. Eng. 136, 355e364.
Fernandez, F., Terry, R., Inomata, T., 2002. An ethnoarchaeological study of chemical
residues in the ﬂoors and soils of Q’eqchi’ Maya houses at Las Pozas, Guatemala.
Geoarchaeology 17, 487e519.
Field, A., 2005. Discovering Statistics Using SPSS. SAGE, London.
French, C., Sulas, F., Madella, M., 2009. New geoarchaeological investigations of the
valley systems in the Aksum area of northern Ethiopia. Catena 78, 218e233.
Goovaerts, P., 2001. Geostatistical modelling of uncertainty in soil science. Geoderma 103, 3e26.
Hengl, T., 2009. A Practical Guide to Geostatistical Mapping. University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Hengl, T., Heuvelink, G., Rossiter, D., 2007. About regression-kriging: from equations
to case studies. Comput. Geosci. 33, 1301e1315.

492

B. Rondelli et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 41 (2014) 482e492

Hengl, T., Heuvelink, G., Stein, A., 2004. A generic framework for spatial prediction
of soil variables based on regression-kriging. Geoderma 120, 75e93.
Kenoyer, J.M., 1991. Urban processes in the Indus tradition: a preliminary model
from Harappa. In: Meadow, R.H. (Ed.), Harappa Excavations 1986e1990,
Monographs in World Archaeology 3. Prehistory Press, Madison, pp. 29e60.
Kenoyer, J.M., 1998. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Oxford University
Press, Karachi.
Lancelotti, C., 2010. Fuelling Harappan Hearts: Human-Environment Interactions as
Revealed by Fuel Exploitation and Use (Unpublished Ph.D. thesis). University of
Cambridge.
Lancelotti, C., Madella, M., 2012. The “invisible” product: developing markers for
identifying dung in archaeological contexts. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 953e963.
Lark, R., 2012. Towards soil geostatistics. Spat. Stat. 1, 92e99.
Lloyd, C., Atkinson, P., 2004. Archaeology and geostatistics. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31, 151e
165.
Madella, M., Ajithprasad, P., Lancelotti, C., Rondelli, B., Balbo, A., French, C.,
Rodríguez, D., García-Granero, J.J., Yannitto, V., Rajesh, S.V., Gadekar, C.S., Briz, I.,
2010. Social and environmental transitions in arid zones: the North Gujarat
Archaeological Project d NoGAP. Antiq. Gallery 84.
Markofsky, S., Bevan, A., 2011. Directional analysis of surface artefact distributions.
A case study from the Murghab Delta, Turkmenistan. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 428e
439.
Middleton, W.D., 1996. Identiﬁcation of activity areas by multi-element characterization of sediments from modern and archaeological house ﬂoors using
inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy. J. Archaeol. Sci. 23,
673e687.
Mathieu, J.R. (Ed.), 2002. Experimental Archaeology, Replicating Past Objects, Behaviors and Processes. BAR International Series, vol. 1035. Oxford.
Middleton, W.D., Barba, L., Pecci, A., Burton, J.H., Ortiz, A., Salvini, L., Suárez, R.R.,
2010. The study of archaeological ﬂoors: methodological proposal for the
analysis of anthropogenic residues by spot tests, ICP-OES, and GC-MS.
J. Archaeol. Method Th. 17, 183e208.
Milek, K., 2007. Houses and Households in Early Icelandic Society: Geoarchaeology
and the Interpretation of Social Space (Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis). University of
Cambridge.
Milek, K., 2012. Floor formation processes and the interpretation of site activity
areas: an ethnoarchaeological study of turf buildings at Thverá, northeast Iceland. J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 31, 119e137.
Minasny, B., McBratney, A.B., 2007. Spatial prediction of soil properties using EBLUP
with the Matern covariance function. Geoderma 140, 324e336.
Moore, P.D., Webb, J.A., Collison, M.E., 1991. Pollen Analysis, second ed. Blackwell,
Oxford.
P
Ortiz, A., Barba, L., 1993. La quÃmica en el estudio de
reas de actividad. In:
Manzanilla, L. (Ed.), AnatomÃa de un conjunto residencial teotihuacano en
Oztoyahualco. IIA. UNAM, Mexico, pp. 617e660.
Pecci, A., 2003. Los alimentos y sus residuos químicos. Arqueología experimental
para entender actividades prehispánicas. Quaderni di Thule 3, 75e83.
Pecci, A., Ortiz, A., Barba, L., Manzanilla, L., 2010. Distribución espacial de las actividades humanas con base en el análisis químico de los pisos de Teopancazco,

Teotihuacan. In: Ortiz Diaz, E. (Ed.), VI Coloquio Bosh Gimpera. UNAM, Mexico,
pp. 453e478.
Pecci, A., Cau Ontiveros, M., Valdambrini, C., Inserra, F., 2013. Understanding residues of oil production: chemical analyses of ﬂoors in traditional mills.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 40 (2), 883e893.
Possehl, G.L., 2002. The Indus Civilization: a Contemporary Perspective. Altamira
Press, Walnut Creek CA.
Rubio Campillo, X., Cela, J., Hernàndez Cardona, F., 2011. Simulating archaeologists?
Using agent-based modelling to improve battleﬁeld excavations. J. Archaeol. Sci.
39, 347e356.
Salisbury, R.B., 2012. Soilscapes and settlements: remote mapping of activity areas
in unexcavated prehistoric farmsteads. Antiquity 86 (331), 178e190.
Salisbury, R.B., 2013. Interpolating geochemical patterning of activity zones at Late
Neolithic and Early Copper Age settlements in eastern Hungary. J. Archaeol. Sci.
40, 926e934.
Sherman, M., 2011. Spatial Statistics and Spatio-Temporal Data: Covariance Functions and Directional Properties. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
Stolt, M.H., Lindbo, D.L., 2010. Soil organic matter. In: Stoops, G. (Ed.), Interpretation
of Micromorphological Features of Soils and Regoliths. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 369e396.
Sulas, F., Madella, M., 2012. Archaeology at the micro-scale: micromorphology and
phytoliths at a Swahili stonetown. Archaeol. Anthropol. Sci. 4, 1e15.
Terry, R.E., Fernández, F.G., Parnell, J.J., Inomata, T., 2004. The story in the ﬂoors:
chemical signatures of ancient and modern Maya activities at Aguateca,
Guatemala. J. Archaeol. Sci. 31, 1237e1250.
Vyncke, K., Degryse, P., Vassilieva, E., Waelkens, M., 2011. Identifying domestic
functional areas. Chemical analysis of ﬂoor sediments at the ClassicalHellenistic settlement at Düzen Tepe (SW Turkey). J. Archaeol. Sci. 38, 2274e
2292.
Webster, R., Oliver, M., 2007. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists. John Wiley
& Sons, Chichester.
Wells, E., 2010. Sampling design and inferential bias in archaeological soil chemistry. J. Archaeol. Method Th. 17, 209e230.
Wells, E., Moreno Cortés, J.E., 2010. Chimie du sol et activités humaines anciennes:
les exemples archéologiques du Mexique et d’Amérique centrale. Etude Gest.
Sols 17 (1), 67e78.
White, J., Veronesi, F., Corstanje, R., Kral, F., 2012. A geostatistical analysis of soil
properties in the Davis Pond Mississippi freshwater diversion. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
J. 76, 1107e1118.
Wilson, C., Davidson, D., Cresser, M.S., 2009. An evaluation of the site speciﬁcity of
soil elemental signatures for identifying and interpreting former functional
areas. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 2327e2334.
Zhang, C., Tang, Y., Xu, X., 2011. Towards spatial geochemical modelling: use of
geographically weighted regression for mapping soil organic carbon contents in
Ireland. Appl. Geochem. 26, 1239e1248.
Zhu, Q., Lin, H., 2010. Comparing ordinary kriging and regression kriging for soil
properties in contrasting landscapes. Pedosphere 20, 594e606.

