Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

Available online at

ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com

Cultural HELP 2014 Special Issue

A framework for the simpliﬁed risk analysis of cultural heritage assets
Xavier Romão a,∗ , Esmeralda Paupério b , Nuno Pereira a
a
b

CONSTRUCT-LESE, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Construction Institute, CONSTRUCT-LESE, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 29 April 2016
Accepted 12 May 2016
Available online 8 June 2016
Keywords:
Risk assessment
Vulnerability
Hazard
Built immovable cultural heritage
Cultural heritage value

a b s t r a c t
A simpliﬁed risk assessment framework speciﬁcally developed for built immovable cultural heritage
assets is proposed. The framework addresses all the components in a risk analysis and can be used as a
screening procedure for the preliminary assessment of a large number of assets with limited resources.
Furthermore, the framework can also be used to identify cultural heritage assets that require a more
reﬁned and resource demanding risk evaluation. The proposed risk analysis framework falls into the
category of qualitative methods and is based on an existing approach developed for the vulnerability
assessment of critical infrastructures. The qualitative risk analysis of the proposed methodology is based
on a set of structured assessment ﬂowcharts that address the main components of a risk analysis: the
likelihood of the hazard, the vulnerability of the asset to the hazard, the consequences of the hazard, the
loss of value of the asset and the capacity to recover from the event. To illustrate the applicability of the
proposed methodology, an application example is also presented for the case of seismic risk.
© 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction and research aim
Risk is a concept deeply embedded in the collective consciousness of modern society and there is currently a worldwide trend to
enhance our understanding of risks in order to increase our ability
to manage them. Although an objective and universal deﬁnition
of risk is yet to be established [1], it can be seen as a measure
of the combined likelihood of occurrence of a threatening event
and of its potential consequences. Such threatening events are usually termed hazards and represent a potentially damaging physical
event, natural or man-made, that can cause loss of life or injury,
property damage, social and economic disruption or environmental degradation [2]. On the other hand, the potential consequences,
globally termed as losses, can be seen as the result of existing
vulnerabilities (e.g. physical, social, economic or environmental
vulnerabilities) that represent the susceptibility to the damaging
effects of the hazard [2] combined with a lack of ability to cope
with those consequences, i.e. a lack of resilience [3].
Disasters can occur when the probable nature of the hazard
becomes a real damaging event and when the potential consequences turn into actual losses. Over the years, several international
initiatives have been promoted to address the issues of disaster
risk reduction (DRR) and disaster risk management (DRM) in order

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +351 22 508 1956; fax: +351 22 508 1835.
E-mail address: xnr@fe.up.pt (X. Romão).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2016.05.007
1296-2074/© 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

to establish new approaches to reduce the impact of disasters in
society. The wide-ranging concepts of DRR and DRM involve the
development and application of policies, strategies and practices
to minimise disaster risks throughout society. In 2005, the adoption of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) 2005-2015 [4] was
an important step towards these objectives. The HFA was the ﬁrst
internationally accepted framework where international agencies
and national governments have set targets and commitments for
DRR which were deﬁned through ﬁve priorities for action. Of those
ﬁve priorities, Priority Action 2 speciﬁcally addressed risk assessment and monitoring [4]. Therefore, the HFA clearly acknowledged
that the sustainable implementation of disaster mitigation actions
can only be achieved when based on adequate knowledge about
the hazards threatening relevant assets and their vulnerability to
those hazards.
Even though the HFA ended in 2015, efforts towards DRR
continue since the HFA has now been replaced by the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 [5]. This new
framework is expected to build on the achievements of the HFA to
establish a set of improvements. Despite the worldwide progress
achieved in DRR with the implementation of the HFA, several
features were identiﬁed for its enhancement (e.g. see [6–9]).
Among other aspects, the importance of cultural heritage and its
irreplaceable value for society have been explicitly recognized, thus
emphasising the need to assess the impact that potential hazards
may have on cultural heritage [5,6]. Moreover, the signiﬁcant role
of cultural heritage in social cohesion and sustainable development

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

has also been highlighted, making it a key resource to build resilient
societies [10].
Despite these concerns, irreplaceable losses of cultural heritage continue to occur throughout the world as a result of natural
or man-made disasters (e.g. [11–16]). Even though numerous
cultural heritage assets require the implementation of risk mitigation measures (e.g. [17–21]), the development of such measures
needs to be based on adequate knowledge about the risks these
assets are facing. However, for most countries, carrying out a
multi-hazard risk analysis for a large number of cultural heritage
assets requires efforts and budgets that are frequently unavailable. Therefore, assessing the risks for a large number of assets
with limited resources is only feasible when based on simple
methodologies.
To address this need, a methodology developed to perform the
qualitative risk assessment of a large number of assets with limited
resources is presented herein. The proposed methodology involves
all the components in a risk analysis and can be used as a screening
procedure for the preliminary assessment and identiﬁcation of built
and immovable cultural heritage assets that require a more reﬁned
and resource demanding risk evaluation. Given the general format
of the methodology, it is expected to be applicable to any type of
cultural heritage asset threatened by any type of hazard. Speciﬁc
aspects of the framework were further detailed for the particular
case of seismic risk and an application to a single cultural heritage
property is presented to illustrate these procedures. The results of
this example are also correlated with those of a more detailed and
complex analysis.

2. Outlook of existing risk analysis methodologies
The ideal theoretical setting for conducting a risk analysis
requires the probabilistic quantiﬁcation of hazard, vulnerability and resilience. To establish probabilistic representations of
those components, both sufﬁcient/reliable data and adequate analytical/numerical procedures are necessary. However, in many
situations, namely in the risk analysis of cultural heritage assets,
deﬁning these components in a reliable probabilistic context can
be far too complex or resource demanding.
In terms of the hazard, its probabilistic representation can usually be achieved based on data from past events. Typically, for
natural events such as earthquakes, ﬂoods, landslides or volcanic
eruptions, a probabilistic hazard can be deﬁned, e.g. see [22–25].
However, there are ﬁelds for which establishing a probabilistic hazard is still complex mostly due to a lack of adequate data [26–28].
For the case of vulnerability, its deﬁnition relies on the availability of procedures capable of forecasting the damaging/negative
effects that a particular hazard may have on a certain asset under
analysis. Although detailed vulnerability representations can be
established in several contexts, e.g. [29,30], for the particular case of
cultural heritage assets, their complexity and the lack of knowledge
regarding their behaviour in certain situations are often important
obstacles to the detailed deﬁnition of their vulnerability [31,32].
Furthermore, when the risk analysis addresses a large amount
of assets, those difﬁculties are ampliﬁed due to resource-related
restrictions that might also come into play. In such cases, vulnerability analyses often involve methodologies where simpliﬁed
assumptions are made, e.g. see [33–37].
With respect to the resilience component, even though frameworks and quantitative approaches have been developed in
some ﬁelds, e.g. [38–44] and references therein, methodologies
addressing speciﬁc aspects related to the preservation of cultural
heritage assets are still largely unavailable. In this particular case,
disaster prevention with the purpose of coping with the consequences of disasters is commonly addressed by pre-event measures

697

such as implementing education and training programmes in emergency/recovery procedures. Additional predictors of resilience
measuring the expected time and resources needed to restore the
functionality/quality of the asset [38] could potentially also be
established. However, when dealing with cultural heritage assets,
the multidimensional nature of the value of the asset and the complexity of its evaluation [45–48] are a major conceptual obstacle.
Therefore, in such cases, predicting the time and resources that
might be required to restore functionality and quality is much more
difﬁcult.
Based on these descriptions, the applicability of a framework
that involves a comprehensive risk assessment procedure and the
regular update of its results over time needs to integrate the following key issues:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

reliable and sufﬁcient data to establish suitable hazard models;
sufﬁcient and reliable data on the assets under risk;
suitable procedures to model the vulnerability;
adequate models to predict the multidimensional consequences of the hazardous event;
(5) sufﬁcient human, time and economic resources.

In the context of a risk assessment procedure for cultural heritage assets, 4 is the most difﬁcult issue to address, regardless of
the hazard involved. Furthermore, addressing 1, 2 and 3 successfully can be seen to depend on the availability of 5. In most cases,
these resources will set the boundaries of the scope and comprehensiveness of a risk analysis and will be also fundamental for the
successful regular update and monitoring of the risk assessment
results over time. Therefore, when dealing with a large number of
cultural heritage assets, it is important to have a simple methodology that can be used for the preliminary risk analysis of those assets
to establish risk mitigation priorities or to identify assets requiring
more detailed and resource-demanding analyses.
Based on these arguments, it can be seen that a qualitative
risk analysis approach can fulﬁll the necessary requirements. In a
qualitative risk method, risk is deﬁned by a non-numerical estimate. Even though qualitative analyses still involve analytical
and evidence-based characterizations of the risk, they establish
descriptive or categorical treatments of information instead of
numerical estimates. These methods simplify the risk analysis by
reducing the required inputs and calculations to a set of judgments.
The simple risk categories that are produced as outputs can then
be communicated to policymakers and stakeholders in a simpler
way [49]. Qualitative analyses are useful in situations where theory,
data, time or expertise are limited but they also provide adequate
results when decision makers only need a qualitative assessment of
the risk. Furthermore, they can also be useful for problems where
quantitative risk analysis is impractical. For example, the qualitative analysis of a large number of cultural heritage assets (e.g.
nationwide) may be a suitable way to identify situations where a
more detailed assessment is needed [50]. Qualitative methods may
also be preferred when the more important sources of uncertainty
will not change the end result or when quantitative analysis is likely
to lead to inconclusive results [51]. In many situations, a qualitative risk analysis is able to provide risk managers or stakeholders
with enough information for decision-making. For example, the
gathered data may include sufﬁcient evidence indicating that a
given risk can, in fact, be disregarded. On the contrary, the gathered evidence may also point out to an unacceptably large risk, or
to the fact that consequences of a given hazard are so unacceptable that mitigation measures are needed whatever the level of
risk.

698

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

The exposure o he CH unit o the
hazard is relevant?

N

Y
R0
What is the level of damage that the CH unit is expected to suﬀer?
Light

Medium

Heavy

The damages are expected to be
repairable?

The damages are expected to be
repairable?

N

N
Y (enrely)

Y (parally)

Y (enrely)

Y (parally)

The funcon of the CH unit
can be easily restored?

The funcon of the CH unit
can be easily restored?

The funcon of the CH unit
can be easily restored?

The funcon of the CH unit
can be easily restored?

Y

N

Y

N

S

N

Y

N

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

The loss in
value is
signiﬁcant?

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

VI

Y

Y

Y

Y

VIII

VII

Y

Y

VIV

Y

VV

Fig. 1. Proposed risk analysis methodology: assessment of the level of vulnerability of the cultural heritage (CH) unit.

3. Methodology: a framework for the simpliﬁed risk
analysis of cultural heritage assets

qualitative methods and is based on an existing approach developed for the vulnerability assessment of critical infrastructures
[52,53]. The qualitative risk analysis of the proposed methodology
is based on a set of structured assessment ﬂowcharts that address
the main components of a risk analysis: the likelihood of the hazard, the vulnerability of the asset to the hazard, the consequences of
the hazard, and the capacity to recover from the event. Figs. 1 and 2
illustrate the full scope of the ﬂowcharts and outcomes that can be
obtained with the proposed framework. Fig. 1 presents the part of
the method that establishes the vulnerability of the cultural heritage unit and Fig. 2 presents the part where the vulnerability is
combined with the hazard to determine the risk level. As can be
seen, the process of Fig. 1 establishes ﬁve classes of increasing

3.1. General overview of the framework
Based on the arguments in the previous section, a simpliﬁed
methodology is proposed herein which can be used as a screening
procedure for the preliminary risk analysis of built and immovable cultural heritage units. A cultural heritage unit is considered
to be a single property or a component that is part of a property for
which a risk analysis is required (e.g. a church is a unit but the bell
tower of a church may also be considered to be a unit if necessary).
The proposed risk analysis framework falls into the category of

VI

VIII

VII

The likelihood of
the hazard is
High

RI

Medium

VIV

VV
The likelihood of
the hazard is

The likelihood of
the hazard is
Low

High

RII

RIII

Medium

Low

High

RIV

RV

The likelihood of
the hazard is
High

RII

Medium

The likelihood of
the hazard is
Low

RIII

Medium

High

RIV

Medium

Low

RV

Fig. 2. Proposed risk analysis methodology: assessment of the level of risk of the cultural heritage (CH) unit.

Low

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

vulnerability (VI to VV ) which are deﬁned by answering questions
that address the different components contributing to the vulnerability. It is noted that the process also accounts for the case where
a certain cultural heritage unit may have an irrelevant level of risk
(R0 ) if its level of exposure to the hazard under consideration is not
relevant. The process of Fig. 2 can be seen to establish ﬁve classes of
increasing risk (RI to RV ) based on the vulnerability classes deﬁned
by the process of Fig. 1, VI to VV , and on the expected likelihood
of the hazard. The proposed framework considers three categories
of expected hazard likelihood which are termed high, medium and
low. These hazard categories depend on the type of hazard but must
reﬂect the fact that an event with a high likelihood is expected
to have a lower hazard intensity while a low likelihood event is
expected to have a higher hazard intensity. For example, for the
case of earthquakes, a high likelihood event is expected to have a
lower average return period and also a lower magnitude, while for
a low likelihood event it is the opposite. The level of hazard likelihood can be based, for example, on the value or range of the average
return period of a given hazard scenario or based on available historical hazard scenarios. From Fig. 2 it can be seen that, for a given
vulnerability level, when the expected likelihood of the hazard is
high or medium, the subsequent risk level is the same. This conservative approach was considered in order to reduce the number of
risk categories that result from the proposed framework. Furthermore, it can also be seen that when the vulnerability level is VV ,
the subsequent risk level is always RV , irrespective of the expected
likelihood of the hazard. In this case, the framework assumes that
if a cultural heritage unit exhibits the highest level of vulnerability,
the severity of this condition implies the need to also consider the
highest level of risk. With respect to the interpretation of these risk
levels, although the colour code assigned to each level provides a
visual aid, they can be interpreted as follows:

• levels RI and RII correspond to cases where the level of risk can
be accepted;
• level RIII corresponds to a case where the level of risk is at the limit
of acceptability and should be monitored regularly. Given the
qualitative nature of the assessment framework and the uncertainties it may involve, a more detailed analysis of the cultural
heritage unit should be carried out to determine if the actual risk
is not higher;
• level RIV corresponds to a case where the level of risk is unacceptable. A more detailed analysis of the cultural heritage unit should
be carried out to deﬁne risk mitigation measures;
• level RV corresponds to a case where the level of risk is unacceptable and needs to be addressed as soon as possible. A more
detailed analysis of the cultural heritage unit is urgently needed
to deﬁne risk mitigation measures.

Based on the characteristics of the proposed framework, this
methodology is believed to be applicable to any type of cultural
heritage unit threatened by any type of hazard and can be used
to carry out a structured qualitative risk analysis. The application
of the procedure starts by deﬁning the hazard scenario for which
the risk analysis of a certain cultural heritage unit is required. After
deﬁning this scenario, the analyst will then go through the assessment ﬂowchart of Fig. 1 to establish the vulnerability level. The
assessment ﬂowchart of Fig. 2 is then used to combine the vulnerability level with the likelihood of the hazard scenario initially
deﬁned and obtain the risk level. To provide further guidance for
the application of the proposed framework, additional aspects that
need to be considered when analysing the components leading to
the vulnerability classiﬁcation are addressed in the following.

699

3.2. Characterization of the vulnerability analysis components
After deﬁning the hazard scenario and establishing that the
exposure of the cultural heritage unit to that scenario is relevant,
the next step of the vulnerability assessment involves classifying
the expected level of damage of the cultural heritage unit for that
scenario. This expected level of damage needs to be deﬁned according to one of three possible classes: light, medium or heavy. The
following descriptions of those classes can be used as a reference:

• light damage corresponds to the case where the cultural heritage
unit only exhibits non structural damage (i.e. damage that will not
affect the resisting system and the overall stability of the cultural
heritage unit);
• medium damage corresponds to the case where the cultural heritage unit exhibits more severe non structural damage and also
suffers moderate structural damage (i.e. damage that will affect
the resisting system of the cultural heritage unit without compromising its overall stability);
• heavy damage corresponds to the case where the cultural heritage unit exhibits severe structural damage that can make it
unstable (i.e. the overall stability of the cultural heritage unit is
compromised) or that can cause the partial or total collapse of
the cultural heritage unit.

Given the qualitative nature of the proposed framework, the
expected level of damage of a given cultural heritage unit can
be estimated using a simpliﬁed procedure such as expert elicitation (e.g. see [54–56]) or an indicator-based approach. For the
cases of earthquake, ﬂood, ﬁre, hydro-meteorological, landslide and
storm hazards, the procedures and data found in [57–70,33] can be
used to deﬁne simpliﬁed indicator-based approaches suitable to
estimate the expected level of damage. For the particular case of
earthquake hazard, the authors have developed a set of simpliﬁed
indicator – and mechanics – based procedures for speciﬁc types of
cultural heritage units [71]. Additional details of these approaches
are addressed in the following sections.
In case there are heritage assets attached to the main cultural
heritage unit (e.g. tiles, mural paintings, etc.), the vulnerability analysis of the cultural heritage unit should also account for these
elements. This inﬂuence is, however, only accounted for in the
subsequent stages of the vulnerability analysis, even though the
damages to these attached heritage assets and those of the cultural
heritage unit are correlated. The proposed framework assumes that
if light damage is expected in the cultural heritage unit, the damages to the attached cultural assets will be either negligible or fully
restorable. As such, only the potential loss of value is analysed in
this case (Fig. 1). If the expected damage is medium or heavy, the
classiﬁcation of the following stages of the vulnerability analysis
will need to consider the damage and loss in value to both the
cultural heritage unit and the attached heritage assets.
For the cases where the level of damage is expected to be
medium or heavy, the next component of the framework analyses if those damages are repairable (fully or partially) to determine
if it will be possible to reuse the cultural heritage unit as before the
occurrence of the damaging event. Damages are considered to be
repairable if it is physically and technically possible to restore the
physical and material integrity of the cultural heritage unit. In this
context, the following repair possibilities should be examined:

• restoring the materials to their initial conditions without compromising the authenticity of a cultural heritage unit (which may
be connected to its value);

700

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

• stabilizing the damaged elements without masking or hiding the
results of the repair, strengthening, reconstruction or consolidation process carried out in the cultural heritage unit.
Since the expected level of damage was deﬁned in terms of
structural and non structural damage, the reparability analysis
must be carried out separately for these two types of damages. Furthermore, if there are heritage assets attached to the main cultural
heritage unit, this analysis must also account for these elements.
As before, expert elicitation and judgement based on the characteristics of the cultural heritage unit under analysis is expected to
be instrumental to assess the expected damage reparability.
After classifying the possibility of repairing the expected damage, the framework then analyses how easy will it be to restore the
function of the cultural heritage unit back to its pre-damaging event
state (even if only partially). According to the proposed framework,
this stage of the analysis is expected to reﬂect and characterize
the resilience of the cultural heritage unit. To perform this classiﬁcation, the time, human and ﬁnancial resources necessary to
repair and/or stabilize the damages need to be analysed. In addition, resources that may be required to restore and/or develop the
human and technical means necessary for the activities associated
to the function of the cultural heritage unit must also be accounted
for. In this context, it is noted that the ability to restore the predamaging event function may depend on factors other than those
directly related to the cultural heritage unit. For example, factors
related to heritage assets that may be attached to the main cultural
heritage unit (e.g. tiles, mural paintings, etc.) or movable heritage
assets (e.g. museum collections) that may be inside the main cultural heritage unit should be considered in this stage if they are
found to be relevant to its function. As for the previous stages,
expert elicitation and judgement are expected to be instrumental to
classify this stage. As a suggestion, if the availability of human and
ﬁnancial resources is not a restriction, the function of the cultural
heritage unit can be considered to be easily restored if it occurs up
to 6 months after the end of the post-event emergency response
operations.
Finally, the last stage of the vulnerability assessment analyses
the signiﬁcance of the expected loss in value of the cultural heritage unit. Given the simpliﬁed nature of the proposed vulnerability
assessment process and the well-known difﬁculties in deﬁning the
multiple dimensions of cultural heritage value, the loss of value
analysis must also be based on simple qualitative principles. In this
analysis, it is suggested that the following ﬁve types of value, which
are partially based on [72], should be considered to analyse the
expected loss of value of a certain cultural heritage unit:
• evidential value: it derives from the potential of the cultural heritage unit to yield evidence about past human activity (physical
remains, written records, archaeological deposits, etc.);
• historical value: it derives from the ways in which past people,
events and aspects of life can be connected through the cultural
heritage unit to the present (it can be divided into (a) illustrative
value: the extent to which it illustrates something particular or
distinctive; (b) associative value: the extent to which it is associated with a notable family, person, event or movement);
• aesthetic value: it derives from the ways in which people draw
sensory and intellectual stimulation from the cultural heritage
unit (either as a result of conscious design or the seemingly fortuitous outcome of the way in which the cultural heritage unit
has evolved and has been used over time);
• communal value: it derives from the meanings of the cultural
heritage unit for the people who relate to it, or for whom it ﬁgures
in their collective experience or memory (these can include (a)
commemorative and symbolic values: the meanings of a place for
those who draw part of their identity from it, or have emotional

links to it; (b) social value: places that people perceive as a source
of identity, distinctiveness, social interaction and coherence; and
(c) spiritual value: emanate from the beliefs and teachings of an
organised religion, or reﬂect past or present-day perceptions of
the spirit of place);
• economic value: it derives from the potential of the cultural heritage unit to produce ﬁnancial dividends for society as a result of
direct or indirect economic activities connected to the use and
function of the cultural heritage unit.
The expected loss in value can be connected to more than one
class, depending on the type of cultural heritage unit under consideration. Therefore, the analysis of the expected loss in value should
consider the relative importance of each of the ﬁve classes of value,
which needs to be deﬁned case by case. In general, the expected
loss of value will depend on the expected level of damage as well
as on the possibility of repairing such damage. In some cases, the
expected loss of value will also need to consider how easy it is to
restore the function of the cultural heritage unit since this factor
may be particularly relevant for the loss of economic value. Furthermore, it is also noted that the uniqueness and rareness of a
given cultural heritage unit should be reﬂected in the expected loss
of value analysis and it may be associated with any of the referred
classes of value. As for the previous stages, expert elicitation and
judgement is expected to be instrumental to classify this stage. As
for the previous stages, if there are heritage assets attached to the
main cultural heritage unit, their contribution to the loss in value
should also be accounted for. However, it is noted that this analysis
does not include potential losses to movable heritage assets that
may be inside the main cultural heritage unit. In relevant cases,
a separate analysis of the expected loss of value to these heritage
assets should be performed using a suitable methodology.
4. Detailing of the framework for earthquake risk analysis
As previously referred, the presented risk analysis framework
was further developed for the particular case of earthquake hazard. Given that different types of constructions exhibit different
behaviours under earthquakes, cultural heritage units need ﬁrst
to be assigned to architectural classes reﬂecting those differences.
Based on these classes, analysis procedures can then be deﬁned for
each class which account for their speciﬁc behaviour under earthquakes. In the context of seismic analysis, a general classiﬁcation
of cultural heritage units has been deﬁned in [73] that proposes
six classes accounting for the construction morphology and the
building technology. Since the detailing of the proposed framework for earthquake risk analysis was not developed for all types of
constructions, a classiﬁcation is proposed herein establishing only
four architectural classes (CA1 to CA4) partially based on [73]. The
architectural classes considered herein only involve masonry constructions and a different method was deﬁned for each class to
analyse the expected level of earthquake damage. The architectural
classes that were considered are described in Table 1 and Figs. 3–6
present a few examples of cultural heritage units of each class.
For each type of architectural class, simpliﬁed indicator – and
mechanics – based procedures were developed to establish the
Table 1
Architectural classes of masonry constructions considered in the proposed
framework.
Architectural class

Description

CA1
CA2
CA3
CA4

Single-storey or multi-storey masonry building
Hollow slender masonry construction
Solid slender masonry construction
Arched masonry construction

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

701

Fig. 3. Examples of constructions from the architectural class CA1.

expected level of damage under a given scenario of earthquake
occurrence. These procedures are based on the classiﬁcation of several parameters related, for example, to the geometry and shape of
the cultural heritage unit, to its integration with the surrounding
environment, to the type of structural system, to the quality of the
materials, and to its state of conservation. For each architectural
class, a speciﬁc data form and manual were developed to record
all the necessary parameters and determine the expected level of
damage. The detailed description and deﬁnition of the data forms
and manuals developed for the four architectural classes are presented in [71] but are unable to be reproduced herein for the sake
of brevity. However, it is referred that the procedure developed

for cultural heritage units of class CA1 is based on the classiﬁcation
and weighted average of 14 parameters related to the type of structural system, the characteristics of the masonry, the lateral strength
of the structure, geometric factors such as the maximum distance
between walls and the height of the building, the type of foundations and soil conditions, the building position and interaction with
respect to its surroundings, plan and vertical regularity factors, the
type and arrangement of openings, the type of ﬂoor system, the type
of roof system, the state of conservation of the structural system
and the existence of non-structural falling hazards [59,69,74–77].
The weighted average of these parameters leads to the quantiﬁcation of a fragility index which is then correlated with the level of

Fig. 4. Examples of constructions from the architectural class CA2.

702

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

Fig. 5. Examples of constructions from the architectural class CA3.

expected damage. The procedure developed for cultural heritage
units of class CA2 is similar to that of class CA1. For class CA2, the
procedure is based on the classiﬁcation and weighted average of
12 parameters related to the type of structural system, the characteristics of the masonry, the lateral strength of the structure, the
slenderness of the structure, the type of foundations and soil conditions, the construction position and interaction with respect to
its surroundings, plan and vertical regularity factors, the type and
arrangement of openings, the type of ﬂoor and roof systems, the
state of conservation of the structural system and the existence
of non-structural falling hazards [78–81]. The procedures developed for cultural heritage units of classes CA3 and CA4 are different
than those of classes CA1 and CA2 since they are mostly based on
simple mechanics-based approaches. For class CA3, the expected
level of damage is determined from the overturning stability of
the construction and its sensitivity to develop a rocking mechanism. In this case, the procedure depends on the geometric and
material properties of the construction, the type of foundations
and soil conditions, the dynamic properties and the slenderness
of the construction [82–88]. For class CA4, the expected level of
damage is determined by analysing the stability of single or multiple arch systems with respect to transversal failure mechanisms.
The procedure depends on the geometric characteristics of the
structure (i.e. single or multiple arch system, type of pier, type of

abutment, dimensions), the out-of-plane strength of the spandrel
wall, the out-of-plane global arch-piers strength and the soil conditions [89–92].
Since the data required for each form needs to be obtained from
existing documentation and in situ surveys, the level of reliability of the data that is considered is also established in the form.
For cultural heritage units of classes CA1 and CA2, each parameter
required to deﬁne the expected level of damage is assigned with
a reliability level (0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.0 for low to high reliability levels) which reﬂects the uncertainty in the value of each
parameter. A global reliability level of the damage analysis is then
obtained from the weighted average of the individual values. If the
global reliability level is below 0.20, the damage analysis is not valid
and more reliable data is required. If the global reliability level is
between 0.20 and 0.50, the damage analysis is accepted but obtaining additional information on the more uncertain parameters is
recommended. If the global reliability level is higher than 0.50,
the damage analysis is fully accepted. For cultural heritage units
of classes CA3 and CA4, the global reliability level is established
directly in a qualitative way since the number of parameters that
are needed is much lower. For these classes, Low, Medium and High
levels of reliability are qualitatively deﬁned for the damage analysis that are in agreement with the three numerical ranges deﬁned
for classes CA1 and CA2.

Fig. 6. Examples of constructions from the architectural class CA4.

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

Fig. 7. View of the current condition of the Roman Temple of Évora [93].

5. Application of the framework to analyse the seismic risk
of the Roman Temple of Évora
To illustrate the applicability of the proposed framework, the
seismic risk assessment of the Roman Temple of Évora, in Portugal,
is presented as a case study. For the purpose of determining the
level of expected damage, the Roman Temple of Évora was considered to be a cultural heritage unit from the architectural class
CA3, as shown in the following. To provide further details about
this case study application, the procedure leading to the level of
expected damage is also described next.
5.1. Description of the Roman Temple of Évora
The Roman Temple of Évora (Fig. 7) is located in the UNESCO
World Heritage Site of the historical centre of Évora, Portugal. The
exact time of construction of the temple is not known exactly but
the stylistic characteristics of the capitals indicate it likely dates
back from the time of Roman emperor Augustus [94]. Even though
the temple construction is likely to have begun in the 1st century
AD, the construction was only ﬁnished between the 2nd and 3rd
centuries [94]. Over time, the temple structure has undergone several modiﬁcations and reconstructions (see Fig. 8). The temple is
believed to have been destroyed around the 5th century during the
Visigoth invasion and additional writings indicate the temple was
integrated in the Évora castle in the 14th century, serving simultaneously as a fortiﬁed house and as a slaughterhouse [94]. In 1836,
the temple stopped being used as slaughterhouse and became the
focus of a large archaeological intervention that would eventually
lead to the temple’s present conﬁguration [94].

703

Currently, the structure of the temple has fourteen Corinthian
columns exhibiting different levels of damage, conﬁgurations
and heights. Two of these columns are free standing while the
remaining ones are connected by an architrave superimposed on
the top of the columns. The architrave blocks and the column shaft
drums are made of granite while the base blocks and capitals of the
columns are made of marble [95]. Recent studies [96] have shown
that the marble blocks of the architrave are connected to each other
by iron connectors. On the other hand, no connections were found
between the drums of the columns. The total height of the colonnade columns (i.e. the height of the base, shaft and capital) is 7.7 m
while that of the freestanding columns is only 6.7 since they are
missing the capitals [97]. The shaft of each column has a diameter
of approximately 0.90 m [97]. All the columns are spaced 2.25 m
apart and sit on a plinth with an area of 15 × 25 m2 and a height
that varies between of 3.5 m and 4.3 m [97]. The height of the architrave varies across the temple and it is made of one or two layers of
granite blocks, where each block can be assumed to have a height
of 0.60 m and a width of 0.90 m. A speciﬁc mass of 2625 kg/m3 was
considered for the granite blocks while for the marble blocks the
considered speciﬁc mass was 2563 kg/m3 [98].
All the elements of the temple exhibit some level of damage.
The most severe damage can be found in the two middle columns
from the main façade of the temple. The bases and drums of these
columns were cut to give room for a doorway that was possibly
needed when the temple was serving as a slaughterhouse [97].
Many of the marble base blocks also exhibit damages which range
from erosion and chipping of small pieces of stone to complete
separation of the blocks into two pieces. The marble capitals and
several drums of the columns (other than the two columns previously referred) also exhibit loss of material in some places. It was
also seen that most of the elements of the temple exhibit biodeterioration from lichen, algae or moss [97]. For further details regarding
the characteristics, existing damage and dynamic properties of the
temple, readers are referred to [97,99].
In order to analyse the seismic risk according to the framework
previously presented, the temple was considered to be a construction from architectural class CA3 since the structural stability is
controlled mainly by the stone columns. Given the current geometric conﬁguration of the temple, the structure was divided into
four structural systems and a separate damage analysis was performed for each one (Fig. 9). The seismic vulnerability and risk of
the temple were then considered to be governed by the structural
system where the level of damage is expected to be higher. System
1 is a group of three columns along the longitudinal direction of
the temple topped by the architrave which is mostly made of two
layers of granite blocks. System 2 is a group of ﬁve columns along
the longitudinal direction of the temple also topped by the architrave which, in this case, is mostly made of only one layer of blocks.
System 3 is a group of six columns along the transverse direction of
the temple also topped by the architrave which is mostly made of

Fig. 8. Evolution of the structure of the temple over time, after [95]: (a) what is believed to be the original structure from the 1st century AD; (b) structure of temple/slaughterhouse at the beginning of the 19th century; (c) current structure.

704

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

Fig. 9. Structural systems considered for the damage analysis of the temple.

Fig. 10. Schematic representation of Type I (a), Type II (b) and Type III (c) constructions belonging to architectural class CA3 (adapted from [100]).

only one layer of blocks. Finally, System 4 refers to the freestanding
columns.
5.2. Determining the expected level of damage for constructions
of architectural class CA3
According to the procedure detailed in [71], constructions
belonging to architectural class CA3 can be of three types. Constructions of Type I involve cases where the construction can be
analysed using a single rectangular block, Fig. 10 a), and require the

(a)

(b)

geometric parameters represented in Fig. 11 a). Constructions of
Type II involve cases where the construction can be analysed using
a single block with a variable geometry in elevation according
to Fig. 10 b), requiring the geometric parameters represented in
Fig. 11 b). Constructions of Type III involve multi-column structures topped by an architrave providing a connection between the
several elements, Fig. 10 c). For this type of construction, all the
columns are assumed to have the same geometry and the necessary parameters for this case are those represented in Fig. 11 c). For
constructions of Type III, an additional parameter  deﬁned by eq.

(c)

2b

H

2h

c.m.

R0

2H
c.m.

α

α

H/3

2h

R0

0

0
rb

c.m.
α

c.m.
α

R0

R0
0

2b

0
2b

Fig. 11. Geometric parameters of Type I (a), Type II (b) and Type III (c) constructions belonging to architectural class CA3 (c.m. is the centre of mass of the element).

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

705

Finally, for Type III constructions, parameter p reﬂects the stabilising effect of the architrave and is given by:



p=

3·g
·
4 · R0



1+2·
1+3·

(6)

Based on the geometric parameters, the material properties, the
soil characteristics and the selected seismic hazard scenario, the
seismic fragility indexes  1 and  2 are then determined to establish
the expected level of damage. Index  1 deﬁnes a limit for the ground
acceleration up to which a given construction is not expected to
develop a rocking mechanism and is obtained by:
1 =

Fig. 12. Schematic representation of a Type I construction with a sloped foundation.

(1) as the ratio between the mass of the architrave and the mass of
the columns is also necessary.
 = massarchitrave /masscolumns

(1)

The slope angle ˇ of the foundation is also accounted for in this
analysis, Fig. 12. This angle is subtracted from the slenderness angle
␣ to account for the negative inﬂuence of the slope (i.e. it favours
the occurrence of the lifting and overturning of the construction)
leading to the effective slenderness angle ␣f deﬁned by:
˛f = ˛ − ˇ

(2)

The type of foundation connection between the construction and
the soil is also accounted for in the analysis. If the construction
has a foundation system that can provide some sort of base isolation (e.g. such as the orthostat foundation systems referred in [83]
which involve several layers of smoothed stone without mortar
between them), the expected level of damage obtained from the
analysis can be reduced by one level. However, if the base of the
construction sits on top of a surface that can be assumed as rigid
with respect to base isolation features or if the base of the construction is buried at a low-depth, no correction of the expected
level of damage is needed. Finally, if the base of the construction is
buried at a signiﬁcant depth, the damage analysis is not valid since
the behaviour of the construction will be different than assumed
by the methodology presented herein.
In the proposed procedure, the expected level of damage
depends on slenderness and frequency parameters. The slenderness parameter  is given by:
=

1

 

(3)

tan ˛f

On the other hand, the frequency parameter p is deﬁned differently for each type of construction [85]. For Type I constructions,
parameter p is given by:


p=

3·g
4 · R0

(4)

where g is the gravitational acceleration (i.e. 9.81 m/s2 ) and R0 is
deﬁned in Fig. 11. For Type II constructions, parameter p is given
by:


p=

3·g
·
4 · R0




16



3 6 − sin2 ˛

(5)

1
·S

(7)

where S is a soil factor accounting for soil ampliﬁcation effects
deﬁned according to Eurocode 8 [101]. Index  2 establishes a
limit for the ground acceleration above which the construction is
expected to overturn and collapse and is deﬁned by:
2 =

 
5
· tan ˛f
1.7 · S · p · Tc

(8)

where Tc is the period corresponding to the upper limit of the constant acceleration branch of a standard response spectrum. In the
current procedure, Tc is also deﬁned according to Eurocode 8 [101].
The expected level of damage is then determined by comparing the
seismic fragility indexes  1 and  2 with the peak ground acceleration  d that is expected at the site for the selected seismic hazard
scenario. The value of  d can be obtained, for example, from earthquake design standards and can be associated with different hazard
likelihoods using an appropriate relation with the return period
(e.g. see [101]). If  d is lower than  1 , the expected level of damage
is classiﬁed as Light, if  d is higher than  1 but lower than  2 , the
expected level of damage is classiﬁed as Medium and if  d is higher
than  2 , the expected level of damage is classiﬁed as Heavy. Based on
these ranges, Light damage is expected to involve sliding between
the several block components without developing a rocking mechanism. For Medium damage the construction is expected to develop
a rocking mechanism that will increase the damage between the
block components without leading to global overturning. Finally,
Heavy damage will correspond to the case where the overturning
and collapse of the construction will occur.
6. Results and discussion: risk analysis of the Roman
Temple of Évora
The results of the simpliﬁed seismic risk analysis of the Roman
Temple of Évora according to the proposed framework are presented herein. The expected level of damage is determined using
the procedure detailed in the previous section and part of the
results are then compared with those of an advanced numerical
analysis simulating the behaviour of the temple under earthquakes [97]. The selected earthquake scenario corresponds to the
earthquake design intensity set by the Portuguese national annex
of Eurocode 8 [102] which is considered to be a low likelihood
event (i.e. it has an annual probability of occurrence around 0.2%).
Two types of earthquakes need to be considered for this scenario
according to [102]: (i) earthquakes with epicentres mainly offshore
termed earthquake type 1 (EQ1) and (ii) earthquakes with epicentres mainly inland termed earthquake type 2 (EQ2). The value of
 d for the location of the temple is found to be 0.10 g for EQ1 and
0.11 g for EQ2 [102] and the value of  c is also different for these
two types of earthquakes: 0.6 s for EQ1 and 0.25 s for EQ2 [101].
Since the columns of the temple sit on top of a plinth which is not
expected to be made of solid rock [97,99] and based on the soil
mapping for Portugal presented in [102], the foundation soil was
considered to be of type B [103] thus leading to a soil factor S equal

706

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

Table 2
Intermediate parameters needed to determine  1 and  2 .
System

˛f = ˛ (rad)



ς

p (Hz)

1
2
3
4

0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13

8.56
8.56
8.56
7.44

0.331
0.252
0.344
–

1.258
1.275
1.256
1.475

Table 3
Values of  1 and  2 for the EQ1 and EQ2 earthquake types 1.
System

 1 (g)

 2 (EQ1) (g)

 2 (EQ2) (g)

1
2
3
4

0.087
0.087
0.087
0.100

0.337
0.333
0.338
0.331

0.810
0.790
0.811
0.793

to 1.35. With respect to the type of foundation system, no base isolation features such as those referred in the previous section were
considered.
Given the conﬁgurations of Systems 1 to 4 (Fig. 9), it can be
seen that Systems 1 to 3 are Type III constructions while System
4 is a Type I construction. The intermediate parameters needed to
establish  1 and  2 for each system are presented in Table 2 and
are based on the survey data found in [97,99]. The values of  1 and
 2 that were then determined for each earthquake type (EQ1 and
EQ2) are presented in Table 3. Since  2 depends on the value of  c ,
different values are obtained for EQ1 and EQ2.
Since  1 <  d <  2 for Systems 1 to 3, the considered earthquake
scenario is seen to lead to an expected level of damage that is
Medium. These three Systems govern the behaviour of the construction for the intensity of the selected earthquake scenario essentially
because System 4 is shorter. The values that were obtained for
 2 also lead to two other conclusions: the overturning and collapse of the construction is governed by EQ1 and the earthquake
intensity for which it is expected to occur is between three to four
times the intensity of the selected scenario. Both conclusions are
in agreement with the ﬁndings of the advanced numerical simulation studies that were carried out in [97]. Furthermore, the ﬁndings
in [97] are also in agreement with the expected level of damage
that was obtain herein for the earthquake scenario selected for the
current analysis.
Based on this level of damage, the next step of the framework
analyses the reparability of those damages. Given that for medium
damage the construction is expected to develop a rocking mechanism that will cause some physical damage such as sliding and
chipping of small pieces of stone, the level of damage is expected
to be only partially repairable. Nonetheless, given the type of construction, its function is expected to be easily restored and no
signiﬁcant loss of value is foreseen. Based on these considerations,
the vulnerability level of the construction is found to be VII (Fig. 1).
Combining this level of vulnerability with the low likelihood of the
selected earthquake scenario leads to a risk level RIII (Fig. 2).
7. Final remarks
The simpliﬁed risk assessment framework proposed herein can
be used as a screening procedure for the preliminary assessment
of a large number of cultural heritage assets with limited resources
or for the preliminary identiﬁcation of assets that require a more
reﬁned and resource demanding risk evaluation. The procedure
involves a qualitative risk analysis based on a set of structured
assessment ﬂowcharts addressing the main components of a risk
analysis: the likelihood of the hazard, the consequences of the hazard, the vulnerability and the loss of value of the asset and, ﬁnally,
the capacity to recover from the event.

The general framework was further detailed by developing
speciﬁc damage assessment forms and guidelines for the case of
seismic risk [71]. In this context, speciﬁc procedures were developed to analyse the expected level of damage for four types of
cultural heritage masonry constructions. The main aspects of these
procedures were described and an illustrative application for the
Roman Temple of Évora in Portugal was also presented. Comparable results of this application were found to be in agreement with
those of an advanced study simulating the behaviour of the temple
under earthquakes. Nonetheless, additional applications should be
carried out involving constructions damaged by past earthquakes
to validate the proposed methodology.
Further reﬁnements of the proposed framework are expected
to be developed in the near future to include more types of constructions as well as to deﬁne similar guidelines for other types of
hazards.

References
[1] T. Aven, On how to deﬁne, understand and describe risk, Reliability Eng. Syst.
Saf 95 (6) (2010) 623–631.
[2] UNISDR Terminology on disaster Risk Reduction. International strategy for disaster reduction, United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009
[http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/terminology, last accessed on April
2016].
[3] S. Manyena, The concept of resilience revisited, Disasters 30 (4) (2006)
433–450.
[4] Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: building the resilience of Nations
and Communities to Disasters. Extract from the ﬁnal report of the World
Conference on Disaster Reduction (A/CONF.206/6). International strategy for
disaster reduction, United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007 [UN/ISDR-072007].
[5] Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015-2030. United Nations
international strategy for disaster reduction, 1st ed., 2015 [UNISDR/GE/2015
- ICLUX EN5000, Geneva, Switzerland].
[6] Synthesis report on consultations on a post-2015 framework on disaster
risk reduction (HFA2). International strategy for disaster reduction, United
Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
[7] The post 2015 Hyogo framework for action: managing risks to achieve
resilience. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee
of the Regions, Brussels, Belgium, European Commission, 2014.
[8] K. Ishigaki, J. Mochizuki, Post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction: a
proposal for monitoring progress, 2014, pp. 304–307 [GRF Davos Planet@Risk
2(5) Special Issue for the Post-2015 Framework for DRR].
[9] F. Schreiber, Resilient Cities 2014-5th Global Forum on Urban Resilience and
Adaptation, 2014, pp. 318–323 [GRF Davos Planet@Risk 2(5) Special Issue for
the Post-2015 Framework for DRR].
[10] R. Jigyasu, M. Murthy, G. Boccardi, C. Marrion, D. Douglas, J. King, et al., Heritage and resilience: issues and opportunities for reducing disaster risks.
Fourth session of the Global Platform on Disaster Risk Reduction, ICORPICOMOS, UNISDR, UNESCO, ICCROM, 2013.
[11] Heritage at risk: ICOMOS World Report 2008/2010 on monuments and sites
in danger, in: C. Machat, M. Petzet, J. Ziesemer (Eds.), International council on
monuments and sites, Hendrik Bäßler, 2010.
[12] The Great East Japan earthquake–report on the damage to the cultural heritage, ICOMOS National Committee, Japan, 2011.
[13] R. Kurin, Saving Haiti’s heritage - cultural recovery after the earthquake,
Smithsonian Institution, 2011.
[14] E. Cunliffe, Damage to the soul: Syria’s cultural heritage in conﬂict, Global
Heritage Fund, 2012.
[15] X. Romão, A.A. Costa, E. Paupério, H. Rodrigues, R. Vicente, H. Varum, et al.,
Field observations and interpretation of the structural performance of constructions after the 11 May 2011 Lorca earthquake, Eng. Fail. Anal 34 (2013)
670–692.
[16] Heritage at risk: world report 2011/2013 on monuments and sites in danger,
in: C. Machat, M. Petzet, J. Ziesemer (Eds.), International council on monuments and sites, Hendrik Bäßler, 2014.
[17] D. de la Fuente, J. Vega, F. Viejo, I. Díaz, M. Morcillo, City scale assessment
model for air pollution effects on the cultural heritage, Atmos. Environ 456
(2011) 1242–1250.
[18] M. Rogerio-Candelera, M. Lazzari, E. Cano (Eds.), Science and technology for
the conservation of cultural heritage, CRC Press, 2013.
[19] B. Marzeion, A. Levermann, Loss of cultural world heritage and currently inhabited places to sea-level rise, Environ Res Lett 9 (3) (2014)
034001–034008.
[20] D. D’Ayala, S. Lagomarsino, Performance-based assessment of cultural heritage assets: outcomes of the European FP7 PERPETUATE project, Bull.
Earthquake Eng 13 (1) (2015) 5–12.

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708
[21] G. Lollino, D. Giordan, C. Marunteanu, B. Christaras, I. Yoshinori, C. Margottini
(Eds.), Engineering geology for society and territory - volume 8 – preservation
of cultural heritage, Springer, 2015.
[22] J. Bommer, Deterministic vs. probabilistic seismic hazard assessment: an
exaggerated and obstructive dichotomy, J. Earthquake Eng 6 (S1) (2002)
43–73.
[23] R. Sparks, W. Aspinall, Volcanic activity: frontiers and challenges in forecasting prediction and risk assessment, in: R. Sparks, C. Hawkesworth (Eds.),
The state of the planet: frontiers and challenges in geophysics, geophysical
monograph 19, IUGG, 2004, pp. 359–373.
[24] S. Lari, P. Frattini, G. Crosta, A probabilistic approach for landslide hazard
analysis, Eng. Geol 182 (2014) 3–14 [Part A].
[25] J. Wang, Flood risk maps to cultural heritage: measures and process, J. Cult.
Herit 16 (2) (2015) 210–220.
[26] D. Lange, S. Devaney, A. Usmani, An application of the PEER performance
based earthquake engineering framework to structures in ﬁre, Eng Struct 66
(2014) 100–115.
[27] S. Kincaid, An investigation into the ﬁre safety management of historic buildings, Shefﬁeld Hallam University Built Environment Research Transactions 4
(1) (2012) 24–37.
[28] K. Smith, Environmental hazards: assessing risk and reducing disaster, Routledge, 2013.
[29] K. Pitilakis, H. Crowley, A. Kaynia, SYNER-G: typology deﬁnition and fragility
functions for physical elements at seismic risk: buildings, lifelines. Transportation Networks and Critical Facilities, Springer Science & Business Media,
2014 [Vol. 27].
[30] L’. Solín, P. Skubinčan, Flood risk assessment and management: review of
concepts, deﬁnitions and methods, Geograph. J 65 (1) (2013) 23–44.
[31] D. Hadjimitsis, A. Agapiou, D. Alexakis, A. Sarris, Exploring natural and anthropogenic risk for cultural heritage in Cyprus using remote sensing and GIS, Int.
J. Digit. Earth 6 (2) (2013) 115–142.
[32] P. Asteris, M. Chronopoulos, C. Chrysostomou, H. Varum, V. Plevris, N.
Kyriakides, et al., Seismic vulnerability assessment of historical masonry
structural systems, Eng Struct 62–63 (2014) 118–134.
[33] J. Watts Jr., M. Kaplan, Fire Risk Index for historic buildings, Fire Technol 37
(2) (2001) 167–180.
[34] T. Goded, J. Irizarry, E. Buforn, Vulnerability and risk analysis of monuments
in Málaga city’s historical centre (Southern Spain), Bull. Earthquake Eng 10
(3) (2012) 839–861.
[35] A. Blanco-Vogt, J. Schanze, Assessment of the physical ﬂood susceptibility of
buildings on a large scale–conceptual and methodological frameworks, Nat.
Hazard. Earth. Syst. Sci 14 (2014) 2105–2117.
[36] V. Stephenson, D. D’Ayala, A new approach to ﬂood vulnerability assessment for historic buildings in England, Nat. Hazard. Earth. Syst. Sci. 14 (2014)
1035–1048.
[37] P. Ortiz, V. Antunez, J. Martín, R. Ortiz, M. Vázquez, E. Galán, Approach to
environmental risk analysis for the main monuments in a historical city, J.
Cult. Herit. 15 (4) (2014) 432–440.
[38] G. Cimellaro, A. Reinhorn, M. Bruneau, Framework for analytical quantiﬁcation of disaster resilience, Eng. Struct 32 (11) (2010) 3639–3649.
[39] P. Arbon, K. Gebbie, L. Cusack, S. Perera, S. Verdonk, Developing a model and
tool to measure community disaster resilience, Torrents Resilience Institute,
Adelaide, Australia, 2012.
[40] D. Henry, J. Ramirez-Marquez, Generic metrics and quantitative approaches
for system resilience as a function of time, Reliability Eng. Syst. Saf. 99 (2012)
114–122.
[41] S. Menoni, D. Molinari, D. Parker, F. Ballio, S. Tapsell, Assessing multifaceted
vulnerability and resilience in order to design risk-mitigation strategies, Nat.
Hazard 64 (3) (2012) 2057–2082.
[42] C. Zobel, L. Khansa, Characterizing multi-event disaster resilience, Comput.
Oper. Res. 42 (2014) 83–94.
[43] B. Ayyub, Systems resilience for multihazard environments: deﬁnition,
metrics, and valuation for decision-making, Risk Anal 34 (2) (2014) 340–355.
[44] C. Zobel, Quantitatively representing nonlinear disaster recovery, Decis. Sci
45 (6) (2014) 1053–1082.
[45] M. De la Torre (Ed.), Assessing the value of cultural heritage. Research Report,
The Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles, 2002.
[46] K. Vecvagars, Valuing damage and losses in cultural assets after a disaster: concept paper and research options. CEPAL - SERIE Estudios y
perspectivas–Sede Subregional de la CEPAL en México, United Nations Publication, 2006.
[47] P. Nijkamp, Chapter 4 - economic valuation of cultural heritage. The economics of uniqueness: investing, in: G. Licciardi, R. Amirtahmasebi (Eds.),
Historic city cores and cultural heritage assets for sustainable development,
World Bank Publications, 2012.
[48] DassanayakeF D., A. Burzel, H. Oumeraci, Evaluation of cultural losses. XtremRisK Progress Report, Leichtweiß-Institute for Hydraulic Engineering and
Water Resources, Technische Universität Braunschweig, 2012.
[49] L. Cox, D. Babayev, W. Huber, Some limitations of qualitative risk rating systems, Risk Anal 25 (3) (2005) 651–662.
[50] M. Rausand, Risk assessment: theory, methods, and applications, John Wiley
& Sons, 2013.
[51] J. Lund, A risk analysis of risk analysis, J. Contemp. Water Res. Educ 140 (1)
(2008) 53–60.
[52] S. Krings, Verwundbarkeitsassessment der Strom- und Trinkwasserversorgung gegenüber Hochwasserereignissen, in: J. Birkmann, S. Dech, M.

[53]

[54]
[55]

[56]

[57]
[58]
[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]
[65]

[66]

[67]
[68]

[69]

[70]
[71]

[72]
[73]

[74]
[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]
[80]
[81]

707

Gähler, S. Krings, W. Kühling, K. Meisel, A. Roth, A. Schieritz, H. Taubenböck, M.
Vollmer, T. Welle, J. Wolfertz, Wurm M., Zwenzner H. (Eds.), Abschätzung der
Verwundbarkeit gegenüber Hochwasserereignissen auf kommunaler Ebene,
Federal Ofﬁce of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance, Bonn, 2010.
J. Birkmann, C. Bach, M. Vollmer, Tools for resilience building and adaptive spatial governance, Raumforschung und Raumordnung 70 (4) (2012)
293–308.
R. Cooke, L. Goossens, Expert judgement elicitation for risk assessments of
critical infrastructures, J. Risk Res 7 (6) (2004) 643–656.
A. Babuscia, K. Cheung, An approach to perform expert elicitation for engineering design risk analysis: methodology and experimental results, J. R. Stat.
Soc 177 (2) (2014) 475–497.
M. Catenacci, V. Bosetti, G. Fiorese, E. Verdolini, Expert judgment elicitation
protocols, in: V. Bosetti, M. Catenacci (Eds.), Innovation under uncertainty: the
future of carbon-free energy technologies, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2015.
A. Copping, The development of a ﬁre safety evaluation procedure for the
property protection of parish churches, Fire Technol 38 (4) (2002) 319–334.
R. De Risi, F. Jalayer, F. De Paola, I. Iervolino, M. Giugni, M. Topa, et al., Flood risk
assessment for informal settlements, Nat. Hazard 69 (1) (2013) 1003–1032.
S. Giovinazzi, The vulnerability assessment and the damage scenario in seismic risk analysis, Technical University Carolo-Wilhelmina at Braunschweig
and Faculty of Engineering of the University of Florence, 2005 [PhD Dissertation].
A. Godfrey, R. Ciurean, C. van Westen, N. Kingma, T. Glade, Assessing vulnerability of buildings to hydro-meteorological hazards using an expert based
approach–an application in Nehoiu Valley, Romania, Int. J. Disaster Risk
Reduction 13 (2015) 229–241.
M. Ibrahim, K. Abdul Hamid, M. Ibrahim, A. Mohd Din, R. Mohd Yunus, M.
Yahya, The development of ﬁre risk assessment method for heritage building,
Procedia Eng 20 (2011) 317–324.
F. Jalayer, S. Carozza, R. De Risi, G. Manfredi, E. Mbuya, Performance-based
ﬂood safety-checking for non-engineered masonry structures, Eng. Struct 106
(2016) 109–123.
M. Kappes, M. Papathoma-Köhle, M. Keiler, Assessing physical vulnerability
for multi-hazards using an indicator-based methodology, Appl. Geogr 32 (2)
(2012) 577–590.
Z. Li, F. Nadim, H. Huang, M. Uzielli, S. Lacasse, Quantitative vulnerability estimation for scenario-based landslide hazards, Landslides 7 (2) (2010) 125–134.
A. Mebarki, N. Valencia, J. Salagnac, B. Barroca, Flood hazards and masonry
constructions: a probabilistic framework for damage, risk and resilience at
urban scale, Nat. Hazard. Earth Syst. Sci 12 (5) (2012) 1799–1809.
A. Puissant, M. Van Den Eeckhaut, M. Kappes, M. Papathoma-Koehle, M.
Keiler, J. Hervás, et al., Index-oriented methodologies for landslide consequence analysis: an application to a mountain community in the French
Alps, in: Landslide science and practice, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2013,
pp. 159–167.
R. Spence, I. Kelman, An overview of ﬂood actions on buildings, Eng. Geol 73
(3) (2004) 297–309.
V. Stephenson, D. D’Ayala, A new approach to ﬂood vulnerability assessment
for historic buildings in England, Nat. Hazard. Earth. Syst. Sci 14 (5) (2014)
1035–1048.
R. Vicente, Strategies and methodologies for urban rehabilitation interventions: vulnerability assessment and seismic risk of the buildings of the
downtown of Coimbra, University of Aveiro, 2008 [PhD Dissertation].
J. Watts Jr., Fire risk indexing, in: SFPE handbook of ﬁre protection engineering,
Springer, New York, 2016, pp. 3158–3182.
X. Romão, E. Paupério, N. Pereira, Methodology for the rapid evaluation of
seismic risk in immovable cultural. Report for the National Authority for Civil
Protection, Construction Institute and Faculty of Engineering, University of
Porto, Porto, 2015 [in Portuguese].
Conservation principles - policies and guidance for the sustainable management of the historic environment. English Heritage, 2008.
S. Lagomarsino, S. Cattari, PERPETUATE guidelines for seismic performancebased assessment of cultural heritage masonry structures, Bull. Earthquake
Eng 13 (1) (2015) 13–47.
S. Lagomarsino, On the vulnerability assessment of monumental buildings,
Bull Earthquake Eng 4 (4) (2006) 445–463.
P. Lourenço, D. Oliveira, J. Leite, J. Ingham, C. Modena, F. da Porto, Simpliﬁed indexes for the seismic assessment of masonry buildings: international
database and validation, Eng. Fail. Anal 34 (2013) 585–605.
S. Pereira, Análise de critérios simpliﬁcados para a avaliação de vulnerabilidade sísmica de igrejas, Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto, 2013
[MSc Dissertation. In Portuguese].
A. Simões, J. Milošević, H. Meireles, R. Bento, S. Cattari, S. Lagomarsino,
Fragility curves for old masonry building types in Lisbon, Bull. Earthquake
Eng 13 (10) (2015) 3083–3105.
E. Curti, Vulnerabilità sismica delle torri Campanarie: modelli meccanici e
Macrosismici, Università degli Studi di Genova, 2007 [PhD Dissertation. In
Italian].
V. Sepe, E. Speranza, A. Viskovic, A method for large-scale vulnerability assessment of historic towers, Struct Control Health Monit 15 (3) (2008) 389–415.
S. Casciati, L. Faravelli, Vulnerability assessment for medieval civic towers,
Struct. Infrastruct. Eng 6 (1–2) (2010) 193–203.
M. Shakya, H. Varum, R. Vicente, A. Costa, A new methodology for vulnerability
assessment of slender masonry structures. Second European Conference on
Earthquake Engineering & Seismology, 2014 [Istanbul, Turkey].

708

X. Romão et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 20 (2016) 696–708

[82] Y. Ishiyama, Motions of rigid bodies and criteria for overturning by earthquake
excitations, Earthquake Eng. Struct. Dyn 10 (5) (1982) 635–650.
[83] A. Bayraktar, H. Keypour, A. Naderzadeh, Application of ancient earthquake
resistant method in modern construction technology, in: 15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 2012.
[84] E. Dimitrakopoulos, M. DeJong, Revisiting the rocking block: closed-form
solutions and similarity laws, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 468 (2144) (2012)
2294–2318.
[85] M. DeJong, E. Dimitrakopoulos, Dynamically equivalent rocking structures,
Earthquake Eng. Struct. Dyn 43 (10) (2014) 1543–1563.
[86] E. Dimitrakopoulos, T. Paraskeva, Dimensionless fragility curves for rocking
response to near-fault excitations, Earthquake Eng. Struct. Dyn 44 (12) (2015)
2015–2033.
[87] S. Lagomarsino, Seismic assessment of rocking masonry structures, Bull.
Earthquake Eng 13 (1) (2015) 97–128.
[88] A. Pappas, Structural analysis and modelling approaches for the seismic
vulnerability assessment of archaeological ruins, Università degli Studi di
Padova, 2015 [PhD Dissertation].
[89] D. Oliveira, P. Lourenço, C. Lemos, Geometric issues and ultimate load capacity
of masonry arch bridges from the northwest Iberian Peninsula, Eng. Struct 32
(2010) 3955–3965.
[90] G. Tecchio, P. Zampieri, F. da Porto, C. Modena, A. Prota, G. Manfredi, Simpliﬁed assessment of railway masonry bridges seismic capacity, in: 15th World
Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 2012.
[91] P. Zampieri, G. Tecchio, F. da Porto, C. Modena, Limit analysis for transverse
seismic capacity of multi-span masonry arch bridges, Bull. Earthquake Eng 13
(5) (2015) 1557–1579.
[92] F. da Porto, G. Tecchio, P. Zampieri, C. Modena, A. Prota, Simpliﬁed seismic
assessment of railway masonry arch bridges by limit analysis, Struct. Infrastruct. Eng 12 (5) (2016) 567–591.
[93] Roman Temple at Evora, Portugal. Wikimedia Commons, the free
media repository, 2007 [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:EvoraRomanTemple.jpg, last accessed on April 2016].

[94] Templo Romano de Évora, Direção-Geral do Património Cultural. Ministério da Cultura, 2015 [http://www.patrimoniocultural.pt/pt/patrimonio/
patrimonio-imovel/pesquisa-do-patrimonio/classiﬁcado-ou-em-viasde-classiﬁcacao/geral/view/70489, last accessed on April 2016, in
Portuguese].
[95] L. Lopes, J. Lopes, J. Cabral, P. Sarantopoulos, Caracterização Petrográﬁca dos
Monumentos Romanos de Évora. A cidade de Évora II(4), 2000, pp. 129–142
[in Portuguese].
[96] D. Oliveira, G. Grecchi, A. McCall, J. Noh, E. Speer, M. Tohidi, Seismic analysis of the Roman Temple of Évora, Portugal, in: 15th World Conference on
Earthquake Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 2012.
[97] S. Nayeri, Seismic assessment of the Roman temple in Évora, Portugal, University of Minho, 2012 [MSc Dissertation, Advanced Masters in Structural
Analysis of Monuments and Historical Constructions].
[98] D. Oliveira, S. Nayeri, J. Lemos, R. Alfenim, P. Lourenço, Análise sísmica do Templo Romano de Évora. 5as Jornadas Portuguesas de Engenharia de Estruturas,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2014 [in Portuguese].
[99] G. Grecchi, A. McCall, J. Noh, E. Speer, M. Tohidi, The Roman Temple in Évora:
a conservation proposal. SA7 - integrated project report, advanced masters
in structural analysis of monuments and historical constructions, University
of Minho, 2012.
[100] I. Psycharis, J. Lemos, D. Papastamatiou, C. Zambas, C. Papantonopoulos,
Numerical study of the seismic behaviour of a part of the Parthenon Pronaos,
Earthquake Eng. Struct. Dyn 32 (13) (2003) 2063–2084.
[101] ENV 1998-1. Eurocode 8: design of structures for earthquake resistance - part
1: general rules, seismic actions and rules for buildings, European Committee
for Standardization, Brussels, Belgium, 2004.
[102] NP ENV 1998-1. Portuguese National Annex to Eurocode 8: design of structures for earthquake resistance - part 1: general rules, seismic actions and
rules for buildings, Instituto Português da Qualidade, Lisbon, Portugal, 2010.
[103] V. Silva, Development of open models and tools for seismic risk assessment:
application to Portugal, University of Aveiro, 2013 [PhD Dissertation].

