Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

Evidence for habitual use of fire at the end of the
Lower Paleolithic: Site-formation processes at Qesem Cave, Israel
Panagiotis Karkanas a,*,1, Ruth Shahack-Gross b,1, Avner Ayalon c, Mira Bar-Matthews c,
Ran Barkai d, Amos Frumkin e, Avi Gopher d, Mary C. Stiner f
a

Ephoreia of Palaeoanthropology-Speleology of Southern Greece, Ardittou 34b, 11636 Athens, Greece
b
Kimmel Center for Archaeological Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
c
Geological Survey of Israel, 30 Malchei Israel Street, Jerusalem 95501, Israel
d
Institute of Archaeology, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel
e
Department of Geography, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91905, Israel
f
Department of Anthropology, P.O. Box 210030, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Received 16 September 2006; accepted 9 April 2007

Abstract
The Amudian (late Lower Paleolithic) site of Qesem Cave in Israel represents one of the earliest examples of habitual use of fire by middle
Pleistocene hominids. The Paleolithic layers in this cave were studied using a suite of mineralogical and chemical techniques and a contextual
sedimentological analysis (i.e., micromorphology). We show that the lower ca. 3 m of the stratigraphic sequence are dominated by clastic sediments deposited within a closed karstic environment. The deposits were formed by small-scale, concentrated mud slurries (infiltrated terra rosa
soil) and debris flows. A few intervening lenses of mostly in situ burnt remains were also identified. The main part of the upper ca. 4.5 m consists
of anthropogenic sediment with only moderate amounts of clastic geogenic inputs. The deposits are strongly cemented with calcite that precipitated from dripping water. The anthropogenic component is characterized by completely combusted, mostly reworked wood ash with only rare
remnants of charred material. Micromorphological and isotopic evidence indicates recrystallization of the wood ash. Large quantities of burnt
bone, defined by a combination of microscopic and macroscopic criteria, and moderately heated soil lumps are closely associated with the woodash remains. The frequent presence of microscopic calcified rootlets indicates that the upper sequence formed in the vicinity of the former cave
entrance. Burnt remains in the sediments are associated with systematic blade production and faunas that are dominated by the remains of fallow
deer. Use-wear damage on blades and blade tools in conjunction with numerous cut marks on bones indicate an emphasis on butchering and
prey-defleshing activities in the vicinity of fireplaces.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Micromorphology; Geoarchaeology; Fire; Wood ash; Amudian; Lower Paleolithic

Introduction
The timing of the emergence of human control of fire in the
Paleolithic remains controversial. Archaeological and ecological
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: pkarkanas@hua.gr (P. Karkanas), ruti@wisemail.
weizmann.ac.il (R. Shahack-Gross), ayalon@mail.gsi.gov.il (A. Ayalon),
matthews@mail.gsi.gov.il (M. Bar-Matthews), barkaran@post.tau.ac.il (A.
Barkai), msamor@mscc.huji.ac.il (A. Frumkin), agopher@post.tau.ac.il (A.
Gopher), mstiner@email.arizona.edu (M.C. Stiner).
1
These authors have contributed equally to this study.
0047-2484/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2007.04.002

analyses of data from early and middle Pleistocene sites in Africa
and the Levant suggest that Homo erectus was the earliest hominid to use fire (Clark and Harris, 1985; Gowlett, 1999; Wrangham
et al., 1999; Goren-Inbar et al., 2004). It has been suggested that
fire-building became a regular activity during the final Lower
Paleolithic, ca. 400e500 ka (Rolland, 2004; Gowlett, 2006; but
see James, 1989), and its use is associated with an increase in human social and intellectual complexity. The consensus among
many paleoanthropologists is that unequivocal evidence for the
use of fire dates to the beginning of the Middle Paleolithic, ca.
200e300 ka (James, 1989; Gamble, 1999: p. 165). Even during

198

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

this period, however, evidence of fire is sporadic. Early uses of
fire may have included heating, cooking/roasting, illumination,
and protection from predators. The control over fire may have
been important for colonizing unfamiliar cool environments
(e.g., Clark and Harris, 1985; Wrangham et al., 1999), although
this proposition remains to be tested in light of some surprisingly
early sites in Eurasia. The control over fire may also have contributed to organizational shifts in hominid settlement and
land-use systems, as expressed by ‘‘home bases’’ or residential
camps (Stiner, 2002; Rolland, 2004; Preece et al., 2006). Extensive sequences of burnt remains and control of fire are clearly observed in Middle Paleolithic contexts younger than 200 ka [e.g.,
Kebara and Hayonim caves (Goldberg and Bar-Yosef, 1998),
Grotte XVI (Rigaud et al., 1995), Shanidar (Solecki, 1995),
Les Canalettes (Meignen, 1993); see also Meignen et al.
(2001, 2006)]. These Middle Paleolithic cases present many indications that social activities centered around hearths (Gamble,
1999: 171). Such control of fire, evidenced archaeologically as
deliberately constructed stone-lined hearths or superimposed
hearths, may therefore signal the development of a formal conception of domestic space (e.g., McBrearty and Brooks, 2000;
Henshilwood and Marean, 2003).
Nonetheless, taphonomic problems related to the preservation of ash (Schiegl et al., 1996), charcoal (Cohen-Ofri et al.,
2006), and other indications of fire-use (e.g., burnt bone; Shahack-Gross et al., 1997) hinder the discovery and recognition
of burnt remains. A further complication comes from the fact
that burnt items are not always in primary burial context.
Thus, in order to demonstrate regular use of fire by hominids,
it must be shown by multiple lines of evidence that (1) burnt
artifacts are in primary depositional setting, (2) artifacts
such as bones and lithics are indeed burnt, (3) the surrounding
sediment is composed of ash and/or its stable derivatives (e.g.,
siliceous aggregates, wood phytoliths), and (4) other minerals
(such as clays) are burnt as well. These objectives are best
achieved by combining a set of mineralogical and sedimentological techniques in a contextual approach, with an emphasis
on the technique known as soil micromorphology (Courty
et al., 1989). Micromorphology has improved our knowledge
of identification of ash remains and their preservation conditions in a number of controversial cases (Schiegl et al.,
1996; Weiner et al., 1998; Goldberg et al., 2001). Identifications of ash, its stable derivatives, and unequivocally burnt
bones are accomplished via infrared spectroscopy and bulk
microscopic analyses (for ash: Weiner et al., 1993; Albert
et al., 1999; for bones: Shahack-Gross et al., 1997). The burnt
status of flint tools may be shown using the technique of thermoluminescence. Accurate dating is also very important in order to anchor the sedimentological results in time.
In this work, we present the case of the Amudian site of Qesem Cave, Israel, where the remains of ash and charcoal have
been identified in primary deposition using micromorphological techniques. Moreover, burnt bones have been identified
with certainty. Other mineralogical, geochemical, and microscopic techniques were used to identify the stable derivatives
of wood ash and burnt clays. We show that the 7.5-m sedimentary sequence exposed by excavation in Qesem Cave consists

predominantly of lithified ash remains, sometimes preserving
intact hearths. The Amudian deposits in Qesem Cave therefore
rank among the earliest well-documented examples of the habitual use of fire.
Site description
Qesem Cave is situated 12 km east of Tel-Aviv (Fig. 1) in
a hilly limestone terrain (Barkai et al., 2003). The ceiling of
the cave and part of the Pleistocene deposits were destroyed
by recent road construction, revealing a major part of the
stratigraphic sequence (Fig. 2). Ongoing excavation has exposed ca. 7.5 m of anthropogenic deposits that contain very
rich lithic and faunal assemblages. 230Th/234U dates on speleothems suggest that the occupation of the cave began around
380 ka and ended possibly around 200 ka (Barkai et al.,
2003). The whole lithic industrial sequence of the cave is
blade-dominated (Gopher et al., 2005) and attributed to the
Amudian Industry of the Acheulo-Yabrudian technocomplex.
[The term Acheulo-Yabrudian refers to the cultural/lithic complex postdating the Acheulian and predating the Mousteriand
Jelinek’s ‘‘Mugharan Tradition’’ (Jelinek, 1990)]. The Amudian
Industry is characterized by systematic blade production, and
many of the tools were made on blades, including backed and
retouched blades, end scrapers, burins, and naturally backed
knives. A significant flake component also exists in the
Amudian, and side scrapers and hand axes appear in variable
frequencies (Barkai et al., 2005; Gopher et al., 2005).
The Amudian is a distinct archaeological entity that appears toward the close of the Levantine Lower Paleolithic sequence. Amudian blade production and use may be related to
specific modes or circumstances of resource exploitation,
possibly different from those reflected by other late Lower
Paleolithic entities/industries within the broader AcheuleoYabrudian complex. Use-wear analysis of one of the Amudian
lithic assemblages from Qesem Cave documented the outstanding state of preservation of the flint items and indicated
that butchering was the main activity at the site (Lemorini
et al., 2006). The carcasses of medium-sized ungulates were
processed with sharp cutting tools used specifically for skinning, disarticulation, and cutting meat. The large-mammal
remains are well preserved and bear many indications of
butchering and marrow extraction (Stiner et al., unpublished
data). Burning damage occurs on 10e36% of identified bone
specimens, reaching 11e84% on unidentified bone fragments.
The highest proportions of burnt bones occur in the upper part
of the stratigraphic sequence, where burnt lithic artifacts are
also common. Preliminary thermoluminescence (TL) results
show that some of the artifacts have been heated above
500  C (H. Valladas, personal communication).
Methods
Micromorphology
Samples for micromorphological analysis were collected
from all types of sediment observed in the field (Appendix 1).

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

199

Fig. 1. Plan view of Qesem Cave, including the excavation grid. The light-gray area corresponds to the lower sequence, whereas the dark-gray area corresponds to
the upper one. The arrows mark the former entrance of the cave. The inset shows the location of the cave in Israel.

A second round of sampling based on the information obtained
from the first sample set was conducted in order to confirm the
identified range of natural and anthropogenic processes (Appendix 1). Samples from the lower part of the sequence
were removed by carving oriented blocks with a trowel and
knife and then applying plaster of Paris to their surfaces. An
angle grinder was used to remove most of the blocks from
the strongly cemented upper part of the sequence. The blocks
were 15e30 cm long. A few smaller samples were collected
from a suspected stone-hearth construction from the upper sequence (Appendix 1).
The blocks of sediment were oven-dried in the laboratory at ca.
50  C and then impregnated with polyester resin. Thirty largeformat (75  50 mm) and three small-format (45  35 mm)
thin sections were prepared (Quality Thin Sections, Arizona).
The thin sections were studied using a stereomicroscope at

magnifications of 5 to 40 and a polarizing microscope at magnifications ranging from 50 to 400. Thin sections were
described according to Bullock et al. (1985) and Courty et al.
(1998).
Bulk mineralogy and microscopy
The mineralogical identification of sediment components in
Qesem Cave was done using Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) spectroscopy. Approximately 0.5 mg of sediment were
mixed with about 4 mg of KBr and hand-pressed to produce
a pellet that was introduced into the chamber of a MIDAC
Corporation (Costa Mesa, CA) infrared spectrometer. Spectra
were obtained at 4 cm1 resolution and interpreted using
a built-in library (for more details, see Weiner et al., 1993).
Selected samples were further treated by dissolution in acid

200

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

recrystallized ash and/or geogenic calcite was identified separately for the same samples. The sediments were lightly ground
and large bone fragments were removed manually. The d18O
and d13C measurements of the samples (0.2e0.5 mg) were
made using a VG Isocarb system attached to a SIRA-II
mass-spectrometer. The phosphoric-acid extraction was made
at 90  C, and the d18O and d13C values were calibrated against
the international standard NBS-19 and are reported here in per
mil (%) relative to the Pee Dee Belemnite (PDB) standard.
Results
Field observations and micromorphology
Fig. 2. General view of the upper sequence in Qesem Cave. Arrow 1 indicates
remnants of the former limestone walls of the cave; Arrow 2 indicates a thick
flowstone in the uppermost part of the upper sequence. Arrow 3 indicates
a large limestone boulder, separating the upper and lower sequences and indicating that sedimentary deposition changed in antiquity due to the collapse of
a chamber roof in the cave. Arrow 4 indicates remnants of bedding in the central part of the cave, and Arrow 5 indicates the chaotic appearance close to the
edges of the cave; below are inclined anthropogenic horizons, which are a continuation of the higher part of the lower sequence. Numbers in gray boxes indicate the location of the micromorphological samples (QCB1e19; see
Appendix 1). Samples 13e19 are from the excavated area on the top of the
sequence. The width of the photo is ca. 10 m.

(3N HCl and 3N HNO3), and the acid-insoluble fraction was
analyzed in the FTIR. In addition, several samples representing both cemented ash and mixed ash/geogenic calcite were
analyzed using the heavy-liquid separation technique of Albert
et al. (1999). The various fractions were mounted on microscope slides in order to perform a quantitative phytolith analysis (Albert et al., 1999).
Bone samples were collected for geochemical analysis from
the lower and upper sequences. The sample includes bones that
exhibited all of the color ranges observed in the Qesem Cave
macrofaunal remains. These bone specimens were analyzed using the FTIR following the procedure developed by ShahackGross et al. (1997) to determine whether they were burned or
stained by manganese oxides. Shahack-Gross et al. (1997)
showed that the infrared spectra of the acid-insoluble fraction
obtained from black-colored bones have absorption peaks at
different regions, and thus it can be determined whether the
black color is due to the presence of pyrolized collagen (main
absorption at about 1600 cm1), manganese oxides (main
absorption at about 500 cm1), or both (two main absorption
peaks at 1600 cm1 and 500 cm1). This procedure is necessary because fire is not the only process that causes bones to
become black or white in color.
Stable oxygen and carbon isotopic analysis
Eight sediment samples and two samples of ash from the
burnt wood of modern local trees were analyzed and compared. Representative sediment samples were also selected
for study and consolidated for the preparation of micromorphological thin sections. Therefore, the presence of ash and/or

The sediments in the cave are divided into two major stratigraphic sequences. The lower stratigraphic sequence is exposed and is partly excavated a few meters west of the upper
sequence (Figs. 1 and 3). The upper sequence therefore forms
a ‘‘step’’ on the lower sequence (Fig. 2).
Lower sequence. The lower sequence starts with more than
half a meter of reddish-brown (5YR 4/3) clayey sediment that
is gradually enriched in limestone fragments from bottom to
top. A stratified appearance is locally observable where clay
alternates with coarse clastic material (Fig. 3a). In thin sections, the clay-rich areas consist of reddish-brown clay with
small amounts of silt and some fine sand-sized quartz grains.
Black iron-manganese staining is frequent, indicating formation in a wet environment (Appendix 1). Bone fragments are
abundant and evenly distributed in the sediments, but linear arrangements of elongate specimens are also observed; in the
clay-rich areas, sand-to-silt-sized bone microfragments are
subangular to subrounded (Fig. 4). In thin section, many of
these bone fragments show signs of burning, with an even
transition in color to reddish- and dark-brown tints, opaque
areas, loss of birefringence, and signs of recrystallization
(Courty et al., 1989; Schiegl et al., 2003). Some domains
with clay orientation (unistrial structure) that are also associated with strings of coarser material are rarely observed
(Fig. 4). Phosphate nodules, mostly fragmented or rounded,
are frequently encountered.
The uppermost meter of the lower unit consists of limestone boulders with some interstitial clay (clast-supported
structures). Some intervening black, weathered, crustlike surfaces occur and define crude bedding. Weak sorting and grading effects are observed locally within the beds (Fig. 3b). The
clastic fragments are subrounded and form inclined stony horizons. Cementation is greater in some parts of these deposits.
Incipient rim alteration of the limestones to phosphates is
common. The coarse clastic increments also contain gravelsized bone fragments. In thin sections, calcite hypocoatings
(Fig. 4) consist of micrite (less than 4-micron-sized calcite)
that gradually impregnate the whole matrix, leaving clayey islands. This type of calcite is not biogenic, but is chemically
precipitated.
In portions of the lower sequence, discrete, dark-gray
cemented lenses are observed. In thin sections, they present a
microscopic layered appearance with alternating clay-rich and

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

201

Fig. 4. Microphotograph of the clayey sediments in the lower sequence. The
clay has a grano- and porostriated fabric with very weak parallel orientation.
Note the string of sand-sized quartz grains at the center of the photo (light-gray
grains) and clusters of rounded bone fragments (black grains). Calcite hypocoating of the edges of a void is evident in the lower-right part of the photograph. Sample QCB2c, circular polarized light, length of photo ¼ 2.9 mm.

Fig. 3. General view of the lower sequence in Qesem Cave. (a) Part of the excavated lower sequence; view from west to east (Squares H13e15). The lower
part is composed of clayey sediments with intervening bands of coarser limestone fragments that transition upwards to gravels. Numbers in gray boxes indicate the location of the micromorphological samples QCB 2 and 11 (see
Appendix 1). (b) A view from south to north at the upper part of the lower sequence (Squares GeI18). Bedded gravels with bands of finer material. Some
weak grading and sorting is visible in the depositional increments. Note the
overall inclination of the layers. Length of scale bars is 1 m. Note that this section is no longer available due to road construction.

calcite-rich bands. The calcitic bands consist of recrystallized
ashes with abundant, often oxidized dark-red or brown clay
lumps and burnt bone fragments. Remnants of rhombic
micritic aggregates of ash crystals and calcitic cellular pseudomorphs, including fine black charred compounds, are still visible within these bands (Fig. 5a).
The transition from the lower to the upper sequence is
marked by several exposed large limestone boulders (Fig. 2).
Upper sequence. The upper unit, ca. 4.5 m thick, is remarkably different from the lower one. It consists of a light reddishbrown (5YR 6/4), strongly lithified, mostly massive deposit
that archaeologists traditionally call ‘‘cave breccia.’’ However,
because the term ‘‘breccia’’ refers to cemented angular rubble
in sedimentological terminology, the Qesem Cave upper sequence is best described as cemented calcareous sediment.

Locally, the deposits were intensively fractured postdepositionally, forming pockets of crushed material (Fig. 6). Nonetheless, the stratigraphic integrity of the upper sequence is
not significantly disturbed, indicated by the fact that some of
the original crude horizontal bedding is still visible between
and within the crushed zones (Fig. 6). The sediment close to
the former walls of the cave is different from the sediment
in the central area of the upper sequence. These areas of the
upper sequence are described separately below.
Central area of the upper sequence. Apart from some
crushed zones, the coarser material in the central area is horizontally distributed and contributes to the general visibility
of stratification in the deposit (Fig. 7). Coarser material constitutes less than ca. 10% (by area on thin section) of overall sediment and consists predominantly of gravel-sized, subrounded
limestone and angular bone fragments embedded in a cemented calcareous matrix. In thin section, the finer fraction
of bone is almost always burnt (Fig. 8); there are signs of different degrees of burning, from slightly to highly burnt bone
(calcined). The calcined bone is colorless in plane polarized
light and has an almost white interference color of the first order (see Schiegl et al., 2003). Some bone fragments are shattered and microscopically disintegrated by both heat (Fig. 8)
and postdepositional calcite wedges that subsequently penetrated microfractures in the bones. Although present, burning
damage is less pervasive on larger bone fragments. Localized
mineralogical alterations of the bone mineral are observed
along cracks in some of the bones.
Very few limestone fragments show signs of phosphate
alteration. The general appearance of the calcareous matrix
consists of a continuous micritic to microsparitic (5e20micron-sized calcite) mass that is dotted with oxidized red
or dark-brown clay aggregates and ‘‘dirty,’’ cloudy micritic islands with many fine black particles (Appendix 1). In addition,

202

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

Fig. 7. Detail of the bedded area in the upper sequence (indicated by Arrow 1
in Fig. 6). Strongly cemented sediment with some parallel horizontal bands of
coarser (mostly bones) material. Length of scale bar is 20 cm.

Fig. 5. Cellular structures resembling intact plant tissues now composed of calcite (i.e., calcitic cellular pseudomorphs). Note that these structures are dotted
with several fine black charred compounds. The gray matrix between the
charred materials is calcitic micrite. (a) Sample QCB2b, lower sequence; (b)
Sample QCB7c, upper sequence. Plane polarized light, length of photos: (a)
2.5 mm, (b) 1.5 mm.

Fig. 6. Part of the upper sequence showing crude bedding (Arrow 1) between
crushed zones (Arrow 2). Note also the vertical cracks in the bedded sediments. Length of scale bar is 20 cm.

some dispersed clay is locally evident. Domains of recrystallized microsparitic calcite still preserve the original gray micritic calcareous matrix. It was possible to identify several
remnants of rhombic or rectangular ash crystals of gray micrite aggregates within these domains (Figs. 9e11), along
with moderately recrystallized lumps of ash accompanied by
pseudomorphic plant structures (Figs. 5b and 10). Pure calcareous lenses with well-preserved ash structures occur in certain
localities of the stratified central upper sequence (Fig. 12). The
lenses are always associated with numerous small burnt bone
fragments and clay lumps, sometimes with evidence of reddening from heat (Fig. 12); these are typical microscopic features of in situ ash layers in Middle Paleolithic through recent
sites (Courty et al., 1989). Fragments of well-preserved structured ashes are frequently found inside the less structured

Fig. 8. Orange-red (dark gray to black at the right side of the photograph) burnt
bone intensively shattered and disintegrated. Note that some of the fractures
propagate from a center; these are shrinkage fractures that were most likely
produced due to heating at high temperature. This bone is associated (left
part of the photograph) with wood ash. Upper sequence, sample QCB9, plane
polarized light, length of photo ¼ 2.9 mm.

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

Fig. 9. Microphotograph of mildly recrystallized ash. The dark-gray micritic
aggregates are replaced by light-gray sparitic calcite. Some of the micritic
aggregates have remnant rhombic shapes of the original ash crystals (notably
in the micritic concentration, middle right part of the photograph). Upper
sequence, sample QCB19b, plane polarized light, length of photo ¼ 1.3 mm.

calcareous matrix composed of disturbed ashes. Microscopic
erosional features on previously indurated ash patches suggest
that cementation continued with sedimentation and ash accumulation. This inference is also supported by the presence of
calcified rootlets throughout the sequence; the rootlet casts
are in the form of numerous small bifurcating channels
cemented with sparitic calcite (larger than 20-micron-sized
calcite) or as alveolar septal structures (Fig. 13).
Areas close to the cave walls in the upper sequence. The
sediment closest to the former north wall is more shattered

Fig. 10. Microphotograph of slightly recrystallized ash. Light-gray sparitic calcite replaces the dark-gray micritic aggregates. The groundmass is dotted with
fine black particles of probably charred material. Note the calcitic cellular
pseudomorphs after plant tissues on the upper part of the photo and in the inset. The elongated, rectangular calcitic crystals shown in the inset are clearly
not geogenic and represent calcified wood remains. Upper sequence, sample
QCB7a, plane polarized light, length of photo ¼ 2.7 mm, inset length ¼
1.4 mm.

203

Fig. 11. Microphotograph of strongly recrystallized wood ash. The light-gray
areas of sparitic calcite dominate. Some of the remnants of micritic aggregates
retain the original rectangular and rhombic shapes of ash crystals (A and B),
whereas others have been partially recrystallized and thus have lost their distinctive shapes (C). The inset shows experimentally produced wood ash from
oak (Quercus) as an example of well-preserved, fresh ash crystals. Upper
sequence, sample QSB4a, plane polarized light, length of photo ¼ 0.7 mm.

than that in areas close to the former south wall of the cave
(Fig. 1). Overall, the sediments along the walls have a chaotic
appearance. Here, bedding is less clearly defined and the deposits contain relatively large amounts of infiltrated clay in
the form of moderately cemented patches of orange-red calcareous clay. In thin section, the sediment is heterogeneous
and disturbed. Its matrix is almost pure, massive, and composed of cemented micritic calcite (Fig. 14). However, the matrix encloses several diffuse aggregated mixtures of clay and
fine bone fragments embedded in ‘‘dirty’’ calcite with large
amounts of fine black particles (Fig. 14). The aggregates of
clay/bone admixtures have structures that resemble the recrystallized ashes. Several generations of veins of the same
massive micrite crosscut the matrix. The veins are postdepositional features that can only form within an already solidified
material. Thus, we conclude that the massive micrite is chemically precipitated calcite that formed veins or thin, dirty flowstones (speleothems). Most of the speleothems and veins are
also fragmented and secondarily cemented. Bands of claysupported, rounded speleothem granules were incorporated
during the formation of new speleothems. Erosional surfaces
are common, as are sheared contacts lined with striated clay
on already consolidated material. More recent noncemented
shattered areas are also found. A few large bone fragments
have almost vertical or inclined orientations, also indicating
movement. Shattering was a recurrent process, which continuously modified the deposits that are mostly geogenic in origin,
but these deposits also include disturbed ash-rich anthropogenic material (Fig. 14). Calcified rootlets appear to have
been contemporaneous with the main cementation and fissuring processes.
The lower part of the upper sedimentary sequence close to
the south wall is a mixture of loose, collapsed gravelly

204

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

Fig. 13. Microphotograph of an alveolar septal structure indicative of calcified
roots. Such structures indicate that plants were growing in the cave, suggesting
that the upper sequence was formed in the illuminated part (i.e., entrance) of
the cave. Upper sequence, sample QCB4, plane polarized light, length of
photo ¼ 2.9 mm.

Fig. 12. (a) Photograph of an in situ gray ash lens from the upper sequence.
Note the fine lamination and the dark-gray speckles that are burnt bone fragments. Length of photo is 10 cm. (b) Microphotograph of the same lens. Note
the bedded appearance of micritic calcite associated with dark-red heated-soil
aggregates. On the right edge of the lens there is a cellular calcitic pseudomorph (arrow). Upper sequence, sample QCB7a, plane polarized light, length
of photo ¼ 11 mm.

data given by Berna et al. (2007). The acid-insoluble fraction
of the sediments is composed of clay and quartz. Upon separation in heavy liquid, neither siliceous aggregates nor phytoliths were identified microscopically.
A sample of bones representing the whole stratigraphic
sequence of Qesem Cave was studied using the FTIR and
following the procedure developed by Shahack-Gross et al.
(1997). Unburnt bones from this site are light to dark yellow
in color, sometimes with manganese-oxide dendrites. The

material intercalated with brown clay and showing some
upward grading; these deposits resemble the sediment of the
lower unit. Because they form a tongue of loose sediment
under the cemented upper sequence, they are interpreted as
a continuation of the higher part of the lower sequence.
Bulk mineralogical and microscopic analyses
The sediments in Qesem Cave are composed mainly of calcite, clay, and quartz (Appendix 1). The amounts of clay and
calcite vary spatially, but the sediments in the cave show a pattern of mineralogical uniformity overall. Only small amounts
of dahllite were identified. Authigenic dahllite occurs as
rock reaction rims in the cave sediments, mostly in the lower
sequence, but a few examples were also identified in the upper
sequence. The clay component does not show any spectral indications of having been heated over 500  C, following the

Fig. 14. Microphotograph of subrounded grains of massive micrite without
burnt bone, clay lumps, and charcoal fragments, thus indicating that this is
travertine. The travertine is embedded in chemically precipitated micritic
and sparitic calcite. In the lower central part of the photograph, there is an aggregate of ‘‘dirty’’ micrite dotted with fine black particles and a bone fragment. These types of aggregates most likely represent recrystallized burnt
remains. Upper sequence, sample QCB8b, plane polarized light, length of
photo ¼ 6.5 mm.

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

infrared splitting factor (IRSF) of these bones ranges between
3.4 and 3.9, indicating that bone-mineral preservation is relatively good (e.g., Weiner and Bar-Yosef, 1990; Stiner et al.,
1995). When dissolved in acid (1N HCl solution), however,
these bones do not produce an acid-insoluble residue that
can be attributed to collagen. The black- and brown-colored
bones have IRSF values between 3.4 and 4.0. These bones
produce an acid-insoluble component identified by FTIR as
pyrolized collagen (Fig. 15a) when subjected to acid solution
(i.e., presence of a main absorption peak at about 1600 cm1).
Pyrolized collagen was identified from the insoluble residues
of the bones from both the upper and lower sequences in Qesem Cave. The frequency of manganese oxides is low based
on the absence of an absorption peak at about 500 cm1 in
most spectra obtained from the acid-insoluble fraction of
black bones. Thus, oxide-staining does not affect the colors
of the bones in Qesem Cave to a degree that would hamper
identification of burnt bones by eye. Note that pyrolized collagen is preserved in black burnt bones, while unpyrolized
collagen is not preserved at all. This differential preservation
may occur because pyrolized collagen is essentially charred
organic matter. Most gray- and white-colored bones show infrared spectra typical of calcined bone mineral (Fig. 15b).
There are, however, a few examples of white-colored bones
that are not calcined but are essentially impregnated by
calcite.

205

the ash of two modern wood species, oak (Quercus calliprinos) and carob (Ceratonia siliqua), have distinct isotopic
values that are extremely light relative to the geogenic speleothems in Qesem Cave (Fig. 16). The wood-ash values reflect
the formation of calcitic ash by rapid absorbance of CO2
from the atmosphere upon cooling, similar to the process by
which lime plaster forms (Van Strydonck et al., 1989; Goren
et al., 2005). A recent study shows that recrystallization of
wood ash in the presence of percolating karstic waters results
in isotopic signatures more similar to the values typical of the
chemically precipitated speleothems and in fact forms a mixing
curve from which the ratio of unaltered ash to altered and/or
geogenic calcite can be estimated (Shahack-Gross et al., in
press).
From the eight sediment samples analyzed, only two yield
values that are distinctly different from the cave speleothems
(Fig. 16), indicating that they consist of wood ash that is either
recrystallized and/or mixed with geogenic calcite. Notably,
these samples originated from the upper sequence, where
a clear, gray horizontal layer composed of relatively wellpreserved ash was identified using micromorphology (sample

Stable oxygen and carbon isotopic analyses
Following the micromorphological results, we tested the
isotopic composition of the oxygen and carbon in the Qesem
sediments for indications of wood ash. The results show that

Fig. 15. Representative FTIR spectra of bones from Qesem Cave. (a) Spectrum
of the acid-insoluble fraction of a black-colored bone. The absorbance bands at
around 1650 and 1250 cm1 are indicative of pyrolized collagen. The absorbance bands at around 1085 and 470 cm1 are indicative of siliceous minerals
(quartz and possibly some clay). (b) Spectrum of a white-colored bone. All of
the absorbance bands are attributed to calcined bone mineral. The absence of
absorbance bands at around 1450 and 875 cm1, characteristic of fresh bone
mineral, is due to loss of the carbonate component from the bone dahllite during calcination.

Fig. 16. Oxygen and carbon isotopic values obtained from eight sediment samples from Qesem Cave, and from two modern wood-ash samples. Note that the
two wood-ash samples (closed symbols) have distinctively different values than
the Qesem Cave sediments (open symbols). In addition, note that the range for
Qesem Cave speleothem values (dashed rectangle) overlaps five of the eight
Qesem Cave sediment samples. The two samples that are depleted in both
13
C and 18O relative to the local speleothems probably still include pristine
wood-ash crystals. These samples originate from sample QCB7 from the upper
sequence where ample micromorphological evidence for wood ash was
observed. One sample is enriched in 18O relative to all of the others. This
sample was derived from block QCB9 from the lower sequence. Based on
the micromorphological observations, this sample includes wood ash but also
large amounts of microscopic bone fragments. The isotopic enrichment in
oxygen may thus be attributed to the presence of oxygen from the bones in
the sample.

206

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

QCB-7; Appendix 1). The isotopic results therefore support
our interpretation based on micromorphology that this layer
represents an intact hearth. The rest of the samples show
values similar to local speleothems and thus represent either
completely recrystallized wood ash or geogenic speleothem
calcite, or a mixture of both. Consistent with other findings
in this study, the isotopic results support the presence of
both preserved and recrystallized wood ash in the sediments
of Qesem Cave.

with the presence of microscopic calcified rootlets in the upper sequence (Fig. 12), which normally would form in the
illuminated entrance zone of the former cave. The collapse
event is linked with an abrupt change in the sediment type
between the lower and the upper sequence and with changes
in the karstic configuration of the cavedthe lower sequence,
as already discussed, was formed in a humid inner-cave environment, whereas the upper sequence formed in a shallow
cave.

Discussion

Upper sequence

The field and micromorphological observations, coupled
with bulk mineralogical, microscopic, and isotopic analyses,
permit us to identify materials present in the cave sediments
and to better understand their states of preservation and the
site-formation processes that operated in the two sedimentary
sequences of Qesem Cave.

The upper sequence is dominated by anthropogenic sediment, with only moderate amounts of clastic geogenic inputs
(Appendix 1). Karstic, probably dripping, water precipitated
calcite in the form of flowstones, some of which are dirty
(clastic-rich) and thin and others thick and relatively pure.
Most of the latter are found close to the former south and
east walls of the cave. Circulating pore water also facilitated
the continuous recrystallization of the calcitic ashes in the central area and precipitated calcite in sediment pores and root
passages.
Gradual collapse of the areas closest to the walls is responsible for the chaotic appearance of the sediments and the dominance of geogenic processes in this part of the upper sequence
(Fig. 2). This process was also confirmed in other active caves
in the area and is probably due to differential competence of
the two sequences to accommodate small space rearrangements associated with deep karstic processes.
The presence of the ca. 4.5-m-thick ash-rich deposits in the
central area of the upper sequence of Qesem Cave is of major
importance. The main micromorphological evidence that supports the presence of calcitic-ash remains includes the following: (1) the frequent presence of calcitic-ash crystals (Figs. 9
and 11) and wood-ash cellular pseudomorphs in all areas
where recrystallization is relatively mild (Figs. 5 and 10);
(2) the association of ashes with large amounts of fine burnt
bone fragments and heated soil lumps (Figs. 8 and 12);
(3) the frequent preservation of fragments of well-preserved,
undisturbed ashes (Fig. 12); and (4) the similar microstructure
and content of both mildly and strongly recrystallized areas,
suggesting the same parent material. The light isotopic values
obtained from micromorphologically identified well-preserved
ash support the above interpretations (Fig. 16). Moreover, the
calcareous nature of the sediments and, at the same time, the
lack of any indication of chemically precipitated calcite (except in pores and root passages) similar to that found close
to the walls of the cave suggest that the whole central
sequence consists of a thick accumulation of ash-rich remains. Due to the processes of recrystallization, it is difficult
to define discrete hearths, although at least two were identified
in the upper sequence (i.e., samples QCB-7 and QCB-17;
Appendix 1).
Studies at Middle Paleolithic Levantine cave sites in conjunction with replication fire experiments have shown that
wood ash includes an acid-insoluble component, namely siliceous aggregates and phytoliths (Schiegl et al., 1996; Albert

Lower sequence
The overall stratified appearance of the deposits and the
crude sorting of the clastic material in each increment
(Fig. 3) point to deposition from concentrated mud slurries (infiltrated soil) and debris flows spread over the entire surface of
the cave. However, subsequent wetting and drying have eliminated most of the original depositional features and produced
a microscopically fissured structure. The amount of silt-sized
quartz suggests a terra rosa origin of the clay. Indeed, a reference soil sample from the hills above the cave shows similar
clastic content (Appendix 1). Sediment gravity flows most
likely deposited the gravel layers as the walls of the former
cave gradually collapsed. The overall appearance of this unit
resembles several modern analogues in the karstic system of
the area. Piles of roofspall formed below small karstic conduits and subsequently were lubricated by infiltrated clay slurries. Then, facilitated by gravity, they spread into thick viscous
layers without eroding the already-deposited layers. The features described above, in combination with the phosphatealteration features and the iron-manganese staining, suggest
that the deposition occurred inside a humid, closed karstic
environment (Appendix 1).
Mostly undisturbed lenses of burnt remains are found in
this lower sequence. Overall, however, the lower excavated
unit is principally geogenic in origin and only discrete lenses
of burnt remains are observed. These discrete lenses represent
solitary hearths (i.e., samples QCB-2, QCB-11, and QCB-9;
Appendix 1).
The transition from the lower to the upper sequence
Field observations on the areas of the current cave surface
suggest a gradual enrichment of the lower sequence in limestone roof fall and large boulders that separate it from the
upper sequence. The boulders are the result of the partial collapse of the cave roof (Fig. 2). This inference is in accordance

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

et al., 1999, 2000; Madella et al., 2002). The acid-insoluble
components of the sediments in Qesem Cave were only clay
and quartz. The lack of both siliceous aggregates and phytoliths in the ashy sediments may be explained by the alkalinity
of the cave waters, favoring the preservation of calcite (i.e.,
calcitic ash) and bone dahllite (i.e., relatively low IRSF of
bones), while promoting the dissolution of opaline siliceous
constituents (Karkanas et al., 2000; Shahack-Gross et al.,
2004). Supporting evidence for this proposition is the presence
of a few small lumps (ca. 2e3 cm in diameter) of pure darkgray clay whose inner cores are made of highly weathered basalt rock. Clearly, these lumps are the product of weathering of
the silicate basalt stones, brought to the site by hominins and
discarded in the alkaline cave environment. In addition, we
note that wood ash often contains either small amounts of phytoliths (Albert et al., 1999) or none at all (Tsartsidou et al.,
2007); scant proportions of phytoliths in wood used as fuel
would be even more susceptible to total dissolution in such
an alkaline environment.
The mineralogical analysis of the clay components in
Qesem Cave did not show significant alteration from exposure
to high temperatures, as reported by Berna et al. (2007). It appears that the maximum temperature to which the clays were
exposed was ca. 500  C. This temperature falls well within
the known range of temperatures recorded on the surface
sediment below simple experimental campfires (as opposed
to the heat center of the fire itself; Bellomo, 1993; Berna
et al., 2007).
A final collapse sealed the cave during the late middle
Pleistocene, and it remained closed until it was breached by
road construction in October 2000.
Overall interpretation of the observations
Although evidence of burning in several middle Pleistocene
sites may be explained as the product of naturally induced
fires (James, 1989), the micromorphological and other evidence in Qesem Cave clearly indicate extensive, repeated
use of fire by hominins between roughly 400 and 200 ka. It
is improbable that lightning strikes repeatedly ignited surface
materials in the cave given the pattern of sediment build-up.
The ash remains are not the product of a single or a few events
(which could have burned downwards into the deposits), based
on evidence of several macroscopic and microscopic features.
The presence of calcified rootlets throughout the upper sequence, several generations of cemented fractures (veins)
and flowstone formation, and the erosional features on preserved ash patches suggest that sedimentation (anthropogenic
and geogenic) and cementation were more or less contemporaneous processes throughout the formation of the stratigraphic sequence. This process commonly operates in the
floors of caves (e.g., Gillieson, 1996: 155; Moriarty et al.,
2000). Natural ignition in caves is usually associated with
the presence of large amounts of organic material, often in
the form of animal dung or bat guano (James, 1989; Shahack-Gross, personal observations). These materials do not
burn at high temperatures and do not produce completely

207

combusted sequences (Brochier et al., 1992; Shahack-Gross,
personal observations). There are no indications of burnt organic material of this kind in Qesem Cave. All the ash structures are instead related to wood-burning and complete
combustion. Calcined bones are comparatively common in
Qesem Cave, as identified both mineralogically using the
FTIR and microscopically based on criteria given by Courty
et al. (1989) and Schiegl et al. (2003), which include changes
in color, birefringence, and interference colors. Such a mineralogical transformation occurs at either a very high temperature for a short duration (above 650  C; Shipman et al.,
1984) or from prolonged combustion at temperatures as low
as 500  C (Shahack-Gross, unpublished data). In either case,
calcined bones can be formed at temperatures that only campfires can reach and/or maintain (Bellomo, 1993; Stiner et al.,
1995).
A potential complication in the interpretation of burnt materials is the fact that sediments and inclusions beneath a fire
can be altered by heat penetrating to a depth of up to 15 cm
(Stiner et al., 1995). Thus, it is important to seek evidence
for repeated associations of burnt archaeological materials
across many units of an excavation. In Qesem Cave, bones
show a microscopic burning pattern that is not consistent
with one or a few events of burning of the whole depositdfine
fragments inside pure ash lenses and patches tend to be burnt,
whereas large fragments in disturbed ashes are less frequent or
not burnt at all.
Constructed hearths are difficult to identify in these
strongly lithified deposits. However, a possible stone-lined
hearth was identified in the uppermost part of the sequence.
Unfortunately, we were not able to differentiate clearly the
deposits inside this suspected feature from the surrounding
deposit (sample QCB-17; Appendix 1), so for the moment,
we only note its possible existence.
Conclusions
A major component of the Qesem Cave deposits consists of
recrystallized wood ashes. The geogenic input is more extensive in the lower part of the sequence, where clastic sediments
were deposited in a closed karstic system. The upper ca. 4.5 m
of the sequence consist mainly of anthropogenic sediments
characterized by completely combusted, mostly reworked
wood ashes associated with large amounts of burnt bone, lithic
artifacts, and moderately heated soil lumps. The strong cementation of the deposits is explained by calcite precipitated from
dripping waters and the recrystallization of the ash. The isotopic analysis supports the presence of both preserved and
recrystallized wood ash in the sediments. The frequent presence of microscopic calcified rootlets indicates that the upper
sequence formed near the original (now destroyed) cave
entrance.
The field and microscopic features of the cemented ashy
deposits in the upper sequence in Qesem Cave are similar in
composition to cemented ashy sequences that have been documented in other Paleolithic cave sites (Schiegl et al., 1996;
Macphail et al., 2000; Goldberg and Sherwood, 2006). The

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

208

cemented ash in Qesem Cave is earlier in age, however, and it
is present throughout the sedimentary sequence. In particular,
the burnt remains in Qesem Cave are characterized by completely combusted, mostly reworked wood ashes with only
rare remnants of charred material. The paucity of charred material in ash residues is not surprising and in fact is a common
condition in Paleolithic caves and rock shelters of the dry
Mediterranean Zone (Courty et al., 1989: 223; Macphail
et al., 2000).
Thick, massive ash accumulations that lack the structured
multisequence appearance (sensu Courty et al., 1989) typical
of undisturbed burnt remains have been attributed at a later
cave site to intense occupation and fairly continuous use of
fires (Karkanas et al., 2004). In other words, a high incidence
of fire-building at a location will tend to erase the fine
structures that are so typical of fresh solitary hearth features.
However, very low geogenic sedimentation rates might also
contribute to the destruction of hearth features in a site
due to a higher or extended probability of trampling and
weathering. Both situations may apply in varying degrees
to the formation history of the sediments in Qesem Cave.
Nevertheless, it was possible during fieldwork to identify
a few intact thin ash lenses in the upper sequence. These
lenses display the typically fine, wavy internal fabric of original, undisturbed hearth components under the microscope
(Fig. 12).
The evidence presented above demonstrates repeated use of
fire by Amudian (late Lower Paleolithic) hominins in Qesem
Cave, at least in the upper sequence. It is clear that these hominins possessed fire in the sense of a maintainable technology.
They built small campfires inside the cave, and a variety of activities were conducted in the vicinity of these fires. The ashrich contents of the upper strata indicate many fire-building
events, supporting the interpretation of habitual use of fire in
the cave. Traces of fire are also observed in the lower stratigraphic sequence, but for the moment, we cannot demonstrate
frequent use of fire in the oldest layers.

A number of other Lower Paleolithic sites, including
some Acheulo-Yabrudian cases, have yielded burnt materials
that have been interpreted as hearth traces (Tsatskin, 2000;
Meignen et al., 2001; Goren-Inbar et al., 2004; Rolland,
2004; Preece et al., 2006). The findings at Qesem Cave extend beyond the identification of burnt remains in the sediments, however, in that the archaeological and geological
evidence supports a ‘‘residential base’’ scenario. Hearths
formed hubs around which other activities were carried
out in the cave; use-wear damage on blades and blade tools
in conjunction with numerous cut marks and impact fractures on large bones indicate an emphasis on prey butchering, defleshing, and marrow extraction in the vicinity of
fireplaces. Hominin use of fire during the late Lower Paleolithic at Qesem Cave seems to have been grossly similar to
the behavioral patterns observed in later Middle Paleolithic
populations in the Levant region.
The multidimensional approach advocated by this study illustrates the difficulties for field identification of burnt materials and matrix, particularly in the absence of visible
charcoal. Under favorable preservational conditions, however,
the microscopic analysis of intact structures can reveal the true
nature of the sediment and whether or not there is wood ash
(e.g., Weiner et al., 1998; Goldberg et al., 2001).
Acknowledgments
We thank the extended team involved in the excavations at
Qesem Cave. This study was funded by an Irene Levi Sala
CARE Archaeological Foundation grant to RSG and the Kimmel Center for Archaeological Science, Weizmann Institute of
Science. The Qesem Cave research project is supported by the
Israel Science Foundation (grant number 256/05), the L.S.B.
Leakey Foundation (2003e2005), and the Irene Levi Sala
CARE Archaeological Foundation (2003e2006). We are especially grateful to S. Weiner for his insights and assistance in
this research.

Appendix 1. List of micromorphological samples, from bottom to top of the sedimentary sequence at Qesem Cave, and
their description, including major mineral components based on bulk FTIR analysis
Sample no.

Square

Sequence part

QCB-12

Hill above
the cave

QCB-2

H14b

Used as
control for
local soil
infiltration
into the cave
Lower

Depth (cm)

671e694

Field description and FTIR
analysis

Micromorphology

Interpretation

Reddish-brown soil from the
hill above the cave.
IR: clay dominating, little
quartz.

Brown clay with undifferentiated b-fabric
and an overall crack microstructure. Organic
grains are common. Coarse fraction consists
of subangular to subrounded quartz silt and
fine-medium sand.
Alternating clay and subrounded gravel
bands. Clay has weakly undifferentiated
speckled b-fabric to locally granostriated.
Strings of sand- and silt-sized quartz are
observed. Mostly fissured planar voids.
Frequent manganese staining and phosphate
nodules. The cemented lens consists of
recrystallized dusty micrite with visible
rhombic calcitic-ash crystals, burnt bone,
and darkened and reddened clay lumps.

Terra rosa soil.

Dark-brown sediment with
some stony horizons and a
whitish cemented lens in the
middle.
IR: clay, calcite, dahllite
(more calcite in the cemented
lens).

Debris and mud flows.
A mostly in situ burnt
layer is found in
between including
recrystallized wood
ash (i.e. a hearth).
Deposits formed in a
humid closed
environment.

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

209

Appendix 1 (continued )
Sample no.

Square

Sequence part

Depth (cm)

Field description and FTIR
analysis

Micromorphology

Interpretation

QCB-11

H14

Lower

600e614

Alternating bands of clay and recrystallized
dusty micrite dotted with fine dark particles,
fine charcoal fragments and burnt bone, and
authigenic phosphates.

In situ burnt remains
including wood ash
(i.e., a hearth). Closed
cave environment.

QCB-9

K13b

Lower

520e525

L14b

Lower

495e520

Recrystallized dusty micrite densely dotted
with fine black particles. Very abundant
burnt bone. Frequent ghost features of
rhombic wood-ash crystals and some calcitic
pseudomorphic plant structures. Many
darkened and reddened clay lumps.
Upper gravelly part consists of subrounded
limestone clasts with some incipient rim
alteration to phosphate. Bone is abundant.
Matrix and lower clayey part consists of
grano- and porostriated clay with sand- and
silt-sized quartz. Frequent phosphate
nodules and manganese staining.

In situ reworked wood
ash and other burnt
remains (i.e., a
hearth).

QCB-3

Laminated fine, light-gray,
soft sediment with dark-gray
lenses.
IR of general sediment: clay,
dahllite, calcite.
IR of dark lenses: calcite,
clay, dahllite.
Lightly cemented rounded
feature ca. 50 cm in diameter
of dark-brown to black
sediment with abundant burnt
bones.
IR: clay, dahllite, calcite.
Dark-brown sediment with a
stony upper part.
IR: clay, calcite, dahllite.

Summary of
lower
sequence

Debris and mud flows.
Deposits formed in a
humid closed
environment.

Mostly rock debris
and mud flows with
occasional lenses
composed of wood ash
and burnt bones (i.e.,
in situ hearths).

QCB-5

J8b

Upper

430e450

Light-brown, massive, and
strongly cemented sediment
with some fractures and
veins. Located close to a
feature, and showing vertical
orientation of artifacts.
IR: calcite dominating, little
clay.
Reddish, strongly cemented
sediment with massive
appearance. Abundant bone
fragments.

QCB-10

K10

Upper

388e398

QCB-4

L13c

Upper

348e364

Gray-brown, strongly
cemented sediment with
abundant bone fragments and
a few stone fragments
arranged in bands.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite

QCB-6

K9b

Upper

312e328

QCB-8

M9a

Upper

250e270

Reddish-brown, massive, and
strongly cemented sediment
with abundant bone
fragments.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite.
Orange-reddish and brown
sediments, slightly cemented.
Some crude stratification is
evident.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite.

Highly heterogeneous and disturbed
sediment consisting of aggregated mixtures
of fine burnt bone and dusty micrite
embedded in an almost pure massive micritic
matrix. Secondary calcite infilling voids.
Occasional crosscutting veins of the same
pure massive micrite. Many calcified
rootlets.
Very abundant clay aggregates inside a
matrix of recrystallized dusty micrite. A few
of the clay aggregates are reddened. Burnt
bone is common. Possible authigenic
dahllite.
Dusty micritic matrix, locally recrystallized
to microsparite, dotted with abundant black
fine particles and darkened or reddened clay
lumps. Rhombic calcitic-ash crystals and
wood cellular pseudomorphs are frequently
discerned in the less recrystallized areas.
Many bifurcating channels and septal
alveolar structures of sparitic calcite.
Abundant bone; the finer fragments are
burnt. A few gravel-sized limestones occur.
Coarse material arranged in bands.
Mostly as above, but with a higher amount
of dusty micrite with fine burnt bone
fragments and black particles.

Highly shattered, mostly pure massive
micritic material with a few inclusions of
dusty micrite dotted with black fine particles
and burnt bone. Many veins of massive
micrite. Occasional bands of clay-supported
granules of rounded travertine fragments.

Travertine enclosing
some fragments of
burnt remains. The
material has been
fractured and
cemented several
times.
Reworked burnt
remains including
wood ash with a
considerable clay
clastic component.
Reworked wood ash
and other burnt
remains. Material
deposited close to the
entrance of the cave.

Strongly reworked
ashes cemented by
travertine.

Travertine with a few
inclusions of burnt
remains. The material
has been fractured,
reworked, and
cemented several
times.

(continued on next page)

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

210
Appendix 1 (continued)
Sample no.

Square

Sequence part

Depth (cm)

Field description and FTIR
analysis

Micromorphology

Interpretation

QCB-7

L10b

Upper

171e195

Light reddish-brown, strongly
cemented sediment with
discrete gray lenses.
Abundant bone fragments.
IR of general sediment:
calcite, clay, dahllite.
IR of gray lenses: calcite
dominating, little clay.

Mainly recrystallized dusty
micrite very rich in burnt bone
fragments and black fine particles.
Two discrete thin lenses of slightly
recrystallized gray dusty micrite
densely dotted with black fine
particles and with abundant ghost
features of rhombic wood-ash crystals
and some calcitic pseudomorphic plant
structures; the lenses are locally
fragmented and have erosional
contacts. Many darkened and oxidized
clay lumps. A few large fragments of
bones and occasional gravel limestone.
They are mostly horizontally aligned.
Abundant calcareous rootlets with
septal alveolar structures.

Two remnants of in
situ burnt layers (i.e.,
superimposed hearths,
inside reworked
ashes). Material
deposited close to the
entrance.

Summary of
lower 3 m of
upper
sequence

Mostly reworked
(mainly trampling and
low-energy water
flow) but also in situ
preserved wood ash
(i.e., hearths).

QCB-15

P11d

Upper

155e160

Gray-brown, cemented
sediment from inside a
possible stone structure.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite.

QCB-16

O11b

Upper

155e160

QCB-17

P11d

Upper

155e160

Pinkish cemented sediment
outside a possible stone
structure
A gray-colored banded stone
that lined the stone structure.
Macroscopically it resembles
cemented ash from the
middle upper sequence, in an
upright position (i.e., vertical
laminations).

QCB-18

P11d

Upper

155e160

QCB-19

P12b

Upper

145e160

QCB-13

Q9c

Upper

149e157

Gray-brown cemented
sediment.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite.

QCB-14

Q8c

Upper

150e155

Light-gray, cemented,
sediment.
IR: calcite, clay, dahllite.

A reddish-brown stone that
lined the stone structure.
Macroscopically it is
cemented massive sediment.
A grayish-brown stone that
lined the stone structure
composed of cemented
sediment.

Subangular to subrounded
sand-sized travertine fragments,
inside a clay-rich recrystallized
micritic matrix with very few
inclusions of dusty micrite dotted
with fine black particles. Many
bone fragments of which the finer
fraction is burnt.
Massive micrite with a few clay
admixtures and a vughy porosity.
Large fragments of moderately
recrystallized dusty micrite with
a lot of rhombic ash crystals and
calcitic cellular pseudomorphs
and many reddened clay lumps.
The fragments are inside a massive
micritic groundmass with inclusions
of recrystallized dusty micrite.
Occasional bone.
As above.

Alternating clay-rich bands and
recrystallized dusty micrite with
many rhombic calcitic-ash crystals,
calcitic cellular pseudomorphs and
reddened clay aggregates. Bone is
abundant.
Sparitic groundmass with little clay and
inclusions of recrystallized dusty micrite.
Many bone fragments; some are burnt.
Authigenic dahllite.
Recrystallized dusty micrite with very
abundant bone. Areas of preserved ash
crystals

Travertine with a few
inclusions of burnt
remains.

Travertine.

Cemented in situ
reworked wood ash
and other burnt
remains (i.e., a
hearth). Stone has
been brought to the
uppermost part of the
section from lower
levels through ancient
human action.
As above.

As above.

Probably a travertine
with a few inclusions
of burnt remains.
Highly reworked
burnt remains.

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

211

Appendix 1 (continued )
Sample no.

Square

Sequence part

Depth (cm)

Field description and FTIR
analysis

Summary of
upper 1.5 m of
upper
sequence

Micromorphology

Interpretation
Reworked wood ash
extensively mixed with
travertine by lowenergy water flow.
Indications for
intentional use of
cemented sediments
from lower exposed
parts of the sequence
by humans.

Notes: The presence of dahllite in almost all samples is mainly due to microscopic bone fragments, and only rarely due to authigenic phosphate. Dolomite
rock fragments have been identified in the upper sequence, as well as extremely weathered basalt. Note that manganese oxides have not been detected widely
using the FTIR, and thus most black fine particles referred to in the appendix and text are probably charcoal fragments, a conclusion reached also using oblique
light microscopy (see also Courty et al., 1989). First set of samples, QCB1e9; second set of samples, QCB10e19.

References
Albert, R.M., Lavi, O., Estroff, L., Weiner, S., Tsatskin, A., Ronen, A.,
Lev-Yadun, S., 1999. Mode of occupation of Tabun Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel during the Mousterian period: a study of the sediments and phytoliths.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 26, 1249e1260.
Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., 2000. Phytoliths in the
Middle Palaeolithic deposits of Kebara Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: study of
the plant materials used for fuel and other purposes. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27,
931e947.
Barkai, R., Gopher, A., Lauritzen, S.E., Frumklin, A., 2003. Uranium series
dates from Qesem Cave, Israel, and the end of the Lower Palaeolithic. Nature 423, 977e979.
Barkai, R., Gopher, A., Shimelmitz, R., 2005. Middle Pleistocene blade production in the Levant: An Amudian assemblage from Qesem Cave, Israel.
Eurasian Prehistory 3, 39e74.
Bellomo, R.V., 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological evidence of fire resulting from human activities. J. Archaeol. Sci. 20,
524e553.
Berna, F., Behar, A., Shahack-Gross, R., Berg, R., Boaretto, E., Gilboa, A.,
Sharon, I., Shalev, S., Shilstein, S., Yahalom-Mack, N., Zorn, J.R.,
Weiner, S., 2007. Sediments exposed to high temperatures: Reconstructing
pyrotechnological processes in late Bronze and Iron Age strata at Tel Dor
(Israel). J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 358e373.
Brochier, J.E., Villa, P., Giacomarra, M., Tagliacozzo, A., 1992. Shepherds and
sediments: geo-ethnoarchaeology of pastoral sites. J. Anthropol. Archaeol.
11, 47e102.
Bullock, P., Fedorroff, N., Jongerius, A., Stoops, G.I., Tursina, T., 1985. Handbook for Soil Thin Section Description. Waine Research Publishers,
Wolverhampton.
Clark, J.D., Harris, W.K., 1985. Fire and its roles in early hominid lifeways.
The African Archaeological Review 3, 3e27.
Cohen-Ofri, I., Weiner, L., Boaretto, E., Mintz, G., Weiner, S., 2006. Modern
and fossil charcoal: aspects of structure and diagenesis. J. Archaeol. Sci.
33, 428e439.
Courty, M.A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R., 1989. Soils and Micromorphology
in Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gamble, C., 1999. The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe. Cambridge Universtiy
Press, Cambridge.
Gillieson, D., 1996. Caves. Processes, Development, Management. Blackwell,
London.
Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1998. Site formation processes in Kebara and Hayonim caves and their significance in Levantine prehistoric caves. In:
Akazawa, T., Aoki, K., Bar-Yosef, O. (Eds.), Neandertals and Modern Humans
in Western Asia. Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, pp. 107e125.
Goldberg, P., Sherwood, S.C., 2006. Deciphering human prehistory through
the geoarchaeological study of cave sediments. Evol. Anthropol. 15,
20e36.

Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Xu, Q., Liu, J., 2001. Site formation
processes at Zhoukoudian, China. J. Hum. Evol. 41, 483e530.
Gopher, A., Barkai, R., Shimelmitz, R., Khalaily, M., Lemorini, C.,
Heshkovitz, I., et al., 2005. Qesem Cave: an Amudian site in central Israel.
J. Isr. Prehist. Soc. 35, 69e92.
Goren, Y., Ayalon, A., Bar-Matthews, M., Schilman, B., 2005. Authenticity
examination of two Iron Age ostraca from the Moussaieff Collection.
Isr. Exploration J. 55, 21e34.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M.E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., BenNun, A., Werker, E., 2004. Evidence of hominid control of fire at Gesher
Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Science 304, 725e727.
Gowlett, J.A.J., 1999. Lower and middle Pleistocene archaeology of the Baringo Basin. In: Andrews, P., Banham, P. (Eds.), Late Cenozoic Environments and Hominid Evolution: A Tribute to Bill Bishop. Geological
Society, London, pp. 123e141.
Gowlett, J.A.J., 2006. The early settlement of northern Europe: fire history in the
context of climate change and the social brain. C.R. Palevol 5, 299e310.
Henshilwood, C.S., Marean, C.W., 2003. The origins of modern human behavior: Critique of the models and their test implications. Curr. Anthropol. 44,
627e651.
James, R., 1989. Hominid use of fire in the lower and middle Pleistocene. Curr.
Anthropol. 30, 1e26.
Jelinek, A.J., 1990. The Amudian in the context of the Mugharan Tradition at
the Tabun Cave (Mount Carmel), Israel. In: Mellars, P. (Ed.), The Emergence of Modern Humans. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, pp. 81e90.
Karkanas, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2000. Diagenesis in prehistoric caves: The use of minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the archaeological record. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27, 915e929.
Karkanas, P., Koumouzelis, M., Kozlowski, J.K., Sitlivy, V., Sobczyk, K.,
Berna, F., Weiner, S., 2004. The earliest evidence for clay hearths: Aurignacian features in Klisoura Cave 1, southern Greece. Antiquity 78,
513e525.
Lemorini, C., Gopher, A., Shimelmitz, R., Stiner, M., Barkai, R., 2006. Usewear analysis of an Amudian laminar assemblage from Acheuleo-Yabrudian Qesem Cave, Israel. J. Archaeol. Sci. 33, 921e934.
Madella, M., Jones, M.K., Goldberg, P., Goren, Y., Hovers, E., 2002. The exploitation of plant resources by Neanderthals in Amud Cave (Israel): The
evidence from phytolith studies. J. Archaeol. Sci. 29, 703e719.
Macphail, R.I., Goldberg, P., Linderholm, J., 2000. Geoarchaeological investigation of sediments from Gorham’s and Vanguard caves, Gibraltar: Microstratigraphical (soil micromorphological and chemical) signatures. In:
Stringer, C.B., Barton, R.N.E., Finlayson, J.C. (Eds.), Neanderthals on
the Edge. Oxbow Books, Oxford, pp. 183e200.
McBrearty, S., Brooks, S.A., 2000. The revolution that wasn’t: A new interpretation of the origin of modern human behavior. J. Hum. Evol. 39, 453e563.
Meignen, L., 1993. L’ abri des Canalettes. Un habitat moustérien sur les
grands Causses (Nant Aveyron). Fouilles 1980e1986. Monographie du
CRA, 10. Editions du CNRS, Paris.

212

P. Karkanas et al. / Journal of Human Evolution 53 (2007) 197e212

Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2001. Le feu au Paleolithique moyen: recherches sur les structures de combustion et le statut des
foyers. L’exemple du Proche-Orient. Paleorient 26, 9e22.
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Speth, J.D., Stiner, M.C., 2006. Middle Paleolithic settlement patterns in the Levant. In: Hovers, E., Kuhn, S.L.
(Eds.), Transitions before the Transition: Evolution and Stability in
the Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age. Springer, New York,
pp. 149e169.
Moriarty, K.C., McCulloch, M.T., Wells, R.T., McDowell, M.C., 2000.
Mid-Pleistocene cave fills, megafauna remains and climate change at Naracoorte, South Australia: towards a predictive model using U-Th dating
speleothems. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 159, 113e143.
Preece, R.C., Gowlett, J.A.J., Parfitt, S.A., Bridgland, D.R., Lewis, S.G., 2006.
Humans in the Hoxnian: habitat, context and fire use at Beeches Pit, West
Stow, Suffolk, UK. J. Quaternary Sci. 21, 485e496.
Rigaud, J.P., Simek, J.F., Ge, T., 1995. Mousterian fires from Grotte XVI
(Dordogne, France). Antiquity 69, 902e912.
Rolland, N., 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic fire a punctuated event? A review of the middle Pleistocene record in Eurasia. Asian
Perspect. 43, 248e280.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological implications. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 23, 763e781.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Pfrezschnetz, H.-U., Conard, N.J., 2003. Palaeolithic
burnt bone horizons from the Swabian Jura: Distinguishing between in situ
fireplaces and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology 18, 541e565.
Shahack-Gross, R., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1997. Black-coloured bones in
Haynom Cave, Israel: differentiating between burning and oxide staining.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 24, 439e446.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Weiner, S., 2004. Bat guano and
preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites. J. Archaeol. Sci.
31, 1259e1272.
Shahack-Gross, R., Ayalon, A., Goldberg, P., Goren, Y., Ofek, B., Rabinovich,
R. Hovers, E. Formation processes of cemented features in karstic cave

sites revealed using oxygen and carbon isotopic analyses: a case study at
Middle Paleolithic Amud Cave, Israel. Geoarchaeology, in press.
Shipman, P., Foster, G., Schoeninger, M., 1984. Burnt bones and teeth: An
experimental study of color, morphology, crystal structure and shrinkage.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 11, 307e325.
Solecki, R.S., 1995. The cultural significance of the fire hearths in the Middle
Paleolithic of Shanidar Cave, Iraq. In: Johnson, E. (Ed.), Ancient People
and Landscapes. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock, pp. 51e63.
Stiner, M.C., 2002. Carnivory, coevolution, and the geographic spread of the
genus Homo. J. Archaeol. Res. 10, 1e63.
Stiner, M.C., Kuhn, S.L., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1995. Differential burning,
recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. J. Archaeol.
Sci. 22, 223e237.
Tsartsidou, G., Lev-Yadun, S., Albert, R.-M., Rosen, A.M., Efstratiou, N.,
Weiner, S., 2007. The phytolith archaeological record: strengths and weaknesses based on a quantitative modern reference collection from Greece.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 34, 1262e1275.
Tsatskin, A., 2000. Acheulo-Yabrudian sediments of Tabun: a view from the
microscope. In: Ronen, A., Weinstein-Evron, M. (Eds.), Toward Modern
Humans: Yabrudian and Micoquian, 400e50 kyears ago. Proceedings of
a Congress Held at the University of Haifa November 3e9 1996, BAR
International Series Vol. S850. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 133e143.
Van Strydonck, M.J.Y., Dupas, M., Keppens, E., 1989. Isotopic fractionation
of oxygen and carbon in lime mortar under natural environmental conditions. Radiocarbon 31, 610e618.
Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 1990. States of preservation of bones from prehistoric sites in the Near East: A survey. J. Archaeol. Sci. 17, 187e196.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1993. Bone preservation in Kebara
Cave, Israel using on-site Fourier transform infrared spectrometry.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 20, 613e627.
Weiner, S., Xu, Q., Goldberg, P., Liu, J., Bar-Yosef, O., 1998. Evidence for the
use of fire at Zhoukoudian, China. Science 281, 251e253.
Wrangham, R.W., Jones, J.H., Laden, G., Pilbeam, D., Conklin-Brittain, N.,
1999. The raw and the stolen: cooking and the ecology of human origins.
Curr. Anthropol. 40, 567e594.

