Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Seasoned or green? Radial cracks analysis as a method for identifying the use
of green wood as fuel in archaeological charcoal
Isabelle Théry-Parisot 1, *, Auréade Henry 1
CEPAM e UMR 6130 CNRS, UNICE e SJA3, avenue des Diables Bleus, 06560 Nice, France

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 12 November 2010
Received in revised form
9 September 2011
Accepted 23 September 2011

For several years, sociological questions have been central in anthracology. The development of socioeconomic approaches based on the recognition of anatomical signatures in wood has made it possible
to focus on topics related to ﬁrewood use and its management. The presence of radial cracks (RC) on
archaeological charcoal is generally interpreted as the result of the burning of green wood. The present
study proposes a veriﬁcation of this theory by the experimental combustion of seasoned and green wood
of Scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris L.). Experimenting with this species was a research priority since it was the
dominant taxon (representing 80e100% of the charcoal remains) identiﬁed in the Palaeolithic European
sites under consideration.
The experiments were conducted using two different methods: (i) inside a mufﬂe furnace that allowed
us to control the combustions, but in which the combustion process is quite different from most
archaeological situations and (ii) in an open ﬁreplace, less controllable but closer to the archaeological
conditions. The systematic quantiﬁcation of the number, length and width of the radial cracks (RC)
measured on the transversal sections of the experimental samples demonstrates that (i) radial cracks
occur independently of the moisture content of the wood before the combustion (on green and seasoned
wood); (ii) however, the average number of radial cracks (RC/cm2) allows distinguishing seasoned from
green wood; (iii) in the mufﬂe furnace, the size of the RC appeared to be a good criterion for discriminating seasoned and green wood, but this observation was not conﬁrmed by the open-air combustions.
Our results clearly show that the appearance of radial cracks is not diagnostic of the combustion of green
wood. Nevertheless, the number of radial cracks (RC/cm2) could represent a new method that might help
identifying the combustion of green wood in archaeological charcoal samples.
Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Radial cracks
Charcoal
Experimentation
Carbonisation of wood
Pinus sylvestris
Fuel
Anthracology

1. Introduction
Charcoal analysis is based on the identiﬁcation of residues
originating from incomplete wood combustion collected in
archaeological sediments or ﬁreplaces. It is mainly carried out for
the purposes of palaeoecological or economic interpretations,
providing information on past vegetation and climate, but also on
the ways in which past populations managed their ﬁrewood. Thus,
charcoal assemblages record sociological habits as well as environmental conditions, which lead us to question their palaeoecological representativeness. Archaeological charcoal analysis

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: isabelle.thery@cepam.cnrs.fr (I. Théry-Parisot).
1
With the contribution of Alain Carré (CEPAM e UMR 6130 CNRS, UNICE e SJA3,
avenue des Diables Bleus, 06560 Nice, France).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2011.09.024

also highlights speciﬁc gathering practices or specialised activities
related to ﬁre (and consequently the functions of the hearth).
The recent development of socio-economic approaches to ﬁrewood management is based both (i) on taxonomic identiﬁcation
and (ii) on the recognition of the phenological and physiological
states of the used wood according to its anatomical signature (i.e.
deadwood, driftwood, seasoned wood, green wood, and decayed
wood). Taxonomic identiﬁcation (i), which is the more common
method employed, provides information on the selected species
but mainly on the palaeoecological context: biotope, plant
community, climate, and exploited territories (e.g., riverine forest
vs. hillslopes). Studying the phenological and physiological states of
the wood (ii) is a more recent and complementary approach to
taxonomic identiﬁcation. It provides complementary indications on
the ways in which wood was collected (e.g., deadwood, driftwood)
and on its combustion properties, allowing a better understanding
of it use.

382

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

Why is it not possible to deﬁne the fuel properties of the wood
only from its taxonomical identity? The properties of wood as
regards combustion depend on four main parameters. These are:
the intrinsic properties of the species, the size, the phenological
(moisture content) and the physiological (healthy, dead or rotten)
states (Théry-Parisot, 2001, 2002; Théry-Parisot et al., 2010).
Among them, the parameter ‘species’ has the least inﬂuence on the
behaviour of wood during combustion. These observations are
supported by most of the ethnographic studies carried out to date.
For example, the study of traditional northern populations living in
tundra and taiga environments shows that a single species in
different states can be used for different purposes: green wood to
make smudge ﬁres or mixed with dry wood to make the ﬁre last
longer; rotten wood for hide smoking, etc. (Alix and Brewster,
2004; Henry et al., 2009).
As ﬁrewood management is an important factor in this discussion, several authors have developed deductive approaches for
characterising the phenological and physiological states of the
wood through the microscopic analysis of charcoal. These
approaches aim at linking speciﬁc anatomical features observed in
the microstructure of charcoal fragments to the combustion of
deadwood, driftwood, seasoned wood, or decayed wood (Théry
et al., 1996; Théry-Parisot, 2001; Théry-Parisot and Texier, 2006;
Marguerie and Hunot, 2007; McParland et al., 2009, 2010;
Moskal-del Hoyo et al., 2010; Scott, 2010; Théry-Parisot et al.,
2010; Henry, 2011). For this purpose, modern analogues are
experimentally reproduced in order to establish comparisons with
the archaeological samples. Nevertheless, the origin of some
signatures remains a subject of debate. This is the case of radial
cracks, often interpreted as resulting from the carbonisation of
green wood, although no experimental studies have clearly
conﬁrmed this theory.
The aims of this research were (i) to investigate the relationship
between the moisture content of Pinus sylvestris and the damage
caused by carbonisation: on the occurrence of RC, their average
number/cm2, the average length and width of RC, taking into
account both artiﬁcial and ‘natural’ experimental conditions; (ii) to
propose a method that allows identifying the combustion of green
wood, applicable for archaeological samples.
2. Previous studies
In archaeological charcoal, the presence of radial cracks resulting from the shrinkage of wood is a common observation. The
shrinkage is a well-known process due to the lowering of the
moisture content below the saturation point of the wood ﬁbres
(around 30e25%). It occurs naturally during the seasoning of wood,
but it is artiﬁcially ampliﬁed during the carbonisation process.
Consequently, the occurrence of radial cracks on charcoal is
considered as a potential indicator for determining the initial
moisture content of the wood (i.e. prior to the carbonisation
process) and, therefore, to discriminate green wood from seasoned
wood.
Previous work on this topic provided qualitative results establishing clearly that carbonisation leads to the contraction of the
entire microstructure of wood. The longitudinal shrinkage varied
from 6.5% to 24% and the transversal shrinkage varied from 12% to
35% (Mac Ginnes et al., 1971; Beall et al., 1974; Moore et al., 1974;
Schweingrüber, 1978; Slocum et al., 1978; Cutter et al., 1980;
Rossen and Olson, 1985; Stimely and Blankenhorn, 1985;
Braadbaart and Poole, 2008; Braadbaart et al., 2009; McParland
et al., 2010). Under speciﬁc conditions, the carbonisation leads to
the appearance of radial cracks (Zicherman, 1981; Prior and Alvin,
1983, 1986; Avat, 1991; Thinon, 1992; Prior and Gasson, 1993;
Scott et al., 2000; Théry-Parisot, 2001; Kumar et al., 2006;

McParland et al., 2007; Pastor-Villegas et al., 2007). According to
Zicherman (1981), radial cracks appear between 200 and 270  C.
Their occurrence is due to (1) the shrinkage resulting from the
evaporation of moisture and (2) the plastic ﬂow due to thermal
stress. According to Prior and Alvin (1983), radial cracks are typically associated with rays: the larger the rays are, the higher their
potential for cracking more they potentially crack. Two main
aspects emerge from the experiments conducted by Prior and Alvin
(1986): (i) artiﬁcial saturation of wood before pyrolysis increases
the shrinkage; (ii) the primary characteristics of the wood species
govern the charring process. For example, the size of the rays and
the nature of the ﬁbres have an inﬂuence on the appearance of RC.
The interaction between these and other factors, such as time and
temperature of the charring, initial moisture content and the size of
the sample, determines the changes observed. In a subsequent
study, Prior and Gasson (1993) concluded that the behaviour of all
woods on charring was greatly inﬂuenced by the nature of their
ﬁbres: “The initial thickness of ﬁbre walls and the proportion of
gelatinous to non-gelatinous ﬁbres were the two characters which
had the greatest effect upon the behaviour of the wood on charring” (Prior and Gasson, 1993: 81).
In a previous work, one of the authors of the present paper
studied the effect of the moisture content and temperature on the
occurrence of radial cracks on three species, P. sylvestris (Scots Pine),
Populus nigra (Black Poplar) and Quercus petraea (Sessile Oak)
(Théry-Parisot, 2001: 64e68). The results showed that (i) the
occurrence of radial cracks is not correlated with the initial moisture
content; (ii) the RC appear under the effect of several combined
factors as well as all dimensional changes due to carbonisation; (iii)
there are differences from one species to the other. The number of
RC depends on the ‘moisture content’ for P. sylvestris. It depends on
the ‘sample’ for Q. petraea and on both ‘sample’ and ‘temperature’
for P. nigra (Théry-Parisot, 2001: 67, Table 17). However, these
results may have been inﬂuenced by the experimental procedure.
The samples of P. sylvestris came from freshly cut wood, whereas the
‘green’ samples of Quercus robur and P. nigra came from artiﬁcially
rehydrated samples. This difference in procedure could explain the
heterogeneity of the results. Braadbaart and Poole (2008) also
observed a differential behaviour of Q. robur (Sessile Oak) and P.
sylvestris (Scots Pine) when subject to thermal stress: from 310 to
380  C the multiseriate rays of oak appeared exploded, whereas this
was not observed on pine, “probably due to the rays being only one
cell wide” (Braadbaart and Poole, 2008: 2438).
3. Material and methods
3.1. Material selected for carbonisation
The phenological state of the plant material prior to burning is
a factor potentially determining the characteristics of the produced
charcoal. The process involved in the occurrence of the radial cracks
is classically imputed to the behaviour of ﬂuids within tissues
subject to heating. To consider this effect, two types of samples
were studied: one composed of living plant material (green wood)
and one of dry wood that had been seasoned for two years.
The samples used for the carbonisation experiments are
branches of P. sylvestris collected from mountain forests in southeastern France. This choice was motivated by two aspects: ﬁrst,
by the fact that our previous work on this species provided
promising results. Second, P. sylvestris was the most common
species in Continental Europe during the Pleistocene (generally
between 80 and 100% of the charcoal remains). Therefore, it allows
direct comparisons with the Pleistocene charcoal assemblages we
studied. Testing this species was a research priority for the study of
ﬁrewood management during the Palaeolithic period.

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

3.2. Carbonisation procedure
The carbonisation procedure was carried out in two types of
structures: (i) in a mufﬂe furnace, allowing control over the heating
process; (ii) in an open ﬁreplace, less controllable but closer to the
prehistoric conditions.
(i) Mufﬂe furnace
The mufﬂe furnace samples consisted of 36 slices of green
wood and 36 slices of seasoned wood (a total of 72 slices of
equal size, i.e. 10 cm in diameter and 3 cm thick). Each slice
was wrapped in aluminium foil and buried in sea sand in order
to exclude oxygen from the combustion atmosphere. Three
carbonisation temperatures were chosen in order to evaluate
the correlation between the occurrence of the radial cracks
and different temperatures: 300  C (12 green samples/12
seasoned wood samples), 500  C (12 green samples/12
seasoned wood samples) and 650  C (12 green samples/12
seasoned wood samples). These temperatures correspond to
the classic examples registered in wood ﬁres. In order to test
the impact of temperature on the appearance of radial cracks,
the wood samples were carbonised according to the ‘thermal
shock’ method, i.e. they were introduced into the furnace only
when the respective temperatures were reached. There, they
were charred for half an hour before the furnace was switched
off and the contents left to cool overnight.
(ii) Open ﬁreplace procedure
Other experiments were carried out in an open ﬁreplace
under laboratory conditions in order to limit the known effects
of extrinsic factors (wind, atmospheric humidity, ﬁreplace
shape, etc.) on the combustion process. The form, size and
maintenance of the ﬁre also have a direct effect on its thermal
behaviour and, consequently, on the residues themselves.
Therefore, by eliminating (to the greatest degree possible) all
variation linked to external factors and by standardising the
experiments as much as possible, we can study the effect of
the combustion process on the wood anatomy. All the
combustions followed a strictly identical protocol: each ﬁreplace consisted of 6 logs of 10 cm in diameter and was constructed and maintained identically.
Four combustions were carried out: two of green wood and
two of seasoned wood. The temperatures were simultaneously
recorded using 12 sensors distributed within the ﬁreplace.
Fifty pieces of charcoal larger than 4 cm were randomly
sampled at the end of each combustion; a total of 200 pieces of
charcoal were observed.

383

discrimination between samples according to qualitative independent parameters: the effect of independent nominal variables
(in this case, the state of the wood: green/seasoned and temperature: 300  C, 500  C and 650  C) on a dependent continuous variable (such as the number of RC/cm2 and their dimensions). Prior to
the statistical analysis, the homogeneity of our measurements has
been systematically veriﬁed using Bartlett’s test.
4. Results
4.1. Mufﬂe furnace samples
-Number of radial cracks/cm2/sample
A ﬁrst observation was that 100% of the charred samples (green
as well as seasoned wood) from the mufﬂe furnace experiment
presented radial cracks.
In Fig. 1, we are able to see that the number of RC/cm2 per sample
appeared as being primarily related to the moisture content of the
wood, but also to the burning temperature (Fig. 1). The increase of
temperature from 300  C to 650  C led to an increase in the number
of radial cracks, both on green and seasoned wood samples. This
effect is more notable on green samples, with a mean of almost 12
RC/cm2 at 300  C, almost 30 RC/cm2 at 500  C and 40 RC/cm2 at
650  C. The effect of the increase in temperature is less important on
seasoned wood samples. Nevertheless, it consistently remains less
important than the impact of the moisture content. The variance
analysis shows a statistical discrimination between green and
seasoned samples (p < 0.0001). The number of radial cracks is on
average ten times greater on the green wood than on the seasoned
wood samples, 34 RC/cm2 and 3.4 RC/cm2 respectively.
-Length and width of the radial cracks
The length and width of the radial cracks were systematically
measured on each sample in order to evaluate the effect of the
temperature and humidity rate on their size.
First, we observed that the length of the radial cracks tended to
decrease as the temperature rose (Fig. 2a). This effect was more
relevant on the seasoned wood samples than on the green wood
ones.

In their ensemble, our observations relate to 272 experimental
charcoal samples (200 from open-air combustion and 72 from
mufﬂe furnace).
3.3. Observations
After carbonisation, the transversal section of a sample of
charcoal larger than 4 cm was observed under reﬂected light
microscopy coupled with image analysis (software Image Pro-Plus).
All the observations were made on a standard surface of 1 cm2.
Three parameters were taken into consideration:
-

Occurrence of radial cracks/sample;
Number of radial cracks (RC)/cm2/sample;
Length and width of each observed RC/sample

The statistical analysis of the results was performed through the
analysis of variances (ANOVA). This method allows evaluating the

Fig. 1. Effect of moisture content and temperature on the number of RC/cm2 (ANOVA
and test PLSD Fisher) in mufﬂe furnace experiments (MF-Exp). The comparison
between seasoned and green wood is based on a mean of the three temperatures. The
pairwise temperature comparisons are based on a mean of the two types of wood
(seasoned and green).

384

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

a

b

Fig. 2. Effect of temperature and moisture content on the length (a) and width (b) of RC/cm2 (ANOVA and test PLSD Fisher), MF-Exp. The comparison between seasoned and green
wood is based on a mean of the three temperatures. The pairwise temperature comparisons are based on a mean of the two types of wood (seasoned and green).

Considering the mean width of the radial cracks, the observed
variations seemed to be random and did not allow us to discriminate between the sizes of the cracks as a function of the carbonisation temperature (Fig. 2b). The mean width of the RC is not
correlated with the carbonisation temperature either on the green
or on the seasoned wood samples.
Inversely, the moisture content has a signiﬁcant effect on the
length (p < 0.0002) and width (p < 0.0073) of the RC (Fig. 3): they
are larger and longer on seasoned wood samples (Fig. 3def) and
smaller and less developed on green wood samples (Fig. 3aec). This
result is highly surprising, because developed slits are usually and
intuitively imputed to the combustion of green wood. The furnace
experiments clearly indicate that under the adopted experimental
conditions (samples introduced in the oven once the proposed
temperatures were reached), the physical process induces
numerous small cracks on the green wood whereas the cracks are
of greater magnitude on the dried wood.
To summarise, the charring temperature has a relevant effect on
the RC, but this effect is less important than the effect of the
moisture content. The occurrence of radial cracks is not a pertinent
indicator for identifying the moisture content of wood (100% of the
samples registered radial cracks, even the seasoned wood ones),
whereas the number and the size of the radial cracks allow such
a discrimination: the radial cracks are (i) more numerous and less
developed on green samples, (ii) fewer and more developed on
seasoned wood samples.
4.2. Open ﬁreplace combustions
In an open-air ﬁreplace, the combustion process is not
controlled and depends on the natural ﬁre process (Fig. 4). Fig. 4
shows the evolution of the temperatures registered during the
combustion (each curve corresponds to the mean value of the 12
sensors per combustion). The heat process did not register notable
differences between the four experiments. The maximal temperatures reached ranged from 650  C to 750  C and were not related to
the initial moisture content. The main difference in the behaviour
of green as compared to seasoned wood is shown by the duration of
the combustion, which is shorter for seasoned wood (4 h 40 min for
the seasoned wood vs. 6 h for the dry wood).

We observed that 70% of the green wood and 65% of the
seasoned wood samples presented radial cracks. The occurrence of
radial cracks is not dependent on the initial moisture content of the
wood and is not a diagnostic signature of the humidity of wood
before combustion.
Subsequently, we tested the effect of the moisture content on
the number of RC/cm2/sample (Fig. 5). The number of radial cracks
can be statistically discriminated according to the moisture
content: they are four times more numerous on green samples
(p ¼ 0.0166), with respectively a mean of 8 RC/cm2 on green wood
samples and a mean of 2 RC/cm2 on seasoned wood samples. The
relationship between the number of radial cracks and the moisture
content observed on furnace samples is conﬁrmed by the open-air
combustion experiments. In contrast to what was observed on the
furnace samples, the size of the radial cracks is rather standardised
and no statistical difference appears between green and seasoned
wood samples (Fig. 6a and b).

5. Interpretation and discussion
The mufﬂe furnace and open-air combustion experiments
present similar results but also differences. Some of the differences
observed between the two approaches could arise because of the
difference in the initial starting material and charring method (i.e.
slices and conﬁned conditions in mufﬂe furnace vs. logs and well
oxygenated conditions in the open-air structure). This is very likely
to affect the behaviour of wood as a result of charring. Nevertheless,
the aim of this double experimental approach was not to compare
both structures but to verify that the promising results obtained
with the mufﬂe furnace experiments (generally used in experimental procedures) could be reproduced in experimental conditions closer to the archaeological contexts. It would have been
preferable to adopt an identical protocol, but this is materially
unrealisable.
The differences between green and seasoned wood charcoal
samples are less signiﬁcant in open-air combustions than in
a furnace. This could be due to the heterogeneous intrinsic and
extrinsic carbonisation conditions in open-air structures, contrasting with the furnace experiments, where the combustions are
standardised. Therefore, it is important to be very careful when

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

385

Fig. 3. The radial cracks are numerous and less developed on green samples (a, b, c), while fewer and more developed on seasoned wood samples (d, e, f) e MF-Exp.

interpreting charcoal experimental specimens produced in
furnaces, since they tend to be too standardised and therefore
difﬁcult to compare to archaeological contexts. It seems preferable
to experiment in conditions comparable with those prevailing in
archaeological contexts. Nevertheless, tests carried out in a furnace
are the only way of controlling the effects of temperature and time.
The results of the mufﬂe furnace and the open ﬁreplace experiments are highly complementary. This procedure should be
generalised for the elaboration of charcoal experimental
collections.
The results of both experiments clearly indicate that there is no
relationship between the occurrence of radial cracks and the initial
moisture content of wood. These results are in accordance with our
previous work (Théry-Parisot, 2001). The occurrence of this
phenomenon has to be interpreted as a direct result of the usual

heating process and not as related to the phenological state of the
wood. The dimensional variations of wood take place in the
hygroscopic ﬁeld, i.e. between the anhydrous state and the ﬁbre
saturation point. However, after a phase of seasoning, bound
moisture always remains in the internal structure of the wood. The
drying of this residual bound moisture, which occurs during the
ﬁrst phase of the combustion, generates internal stresses that lead
to the appearance of radial cracks independently of the wood’s
moisture content (Avat, 1991; Thuvander and Berglung, 2000). The
plastic ﬂow (which is the result of the thermal stress on the lignin
inside the cell walls) involves the cracking of wood without any
relationship to its moisture content (Zicherman, 1981). Therefore,
the percentage of archaeological samples presenting radial cracks is
not an efﬁcient way to identify the combustion of green wood in
ancient hearths.

386

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

a

Fig. 4. Average temperatures recorded during the experimental combustions in open
ﬁreplace experiments (OFP-exp).

However, both experiments also indicated that the mean
number of radial cracks per cm2 seems to be correlated with the
moisture content of the wood. For an equivalent area of observation, green samples always presented a higher mean number of RC.
The latter were more frequent in the furnace than in the open-air
combustions, with respectively 34 RC/cm2 and 8 RC/cm2 on green
wood and 3.4 RC/cm2 and 2 RC/cm2 on seasoned wood. In both
cases, the differences between green and seasoned wood remain
statistically signiﬁcant. Even though the phenomenon is less
important in open-air conditions, the mean number of RC/cm2

b

Fig. 6. Effect of moisture content on the length (a) and width (b) of RC/cm2 (ANOVA
and test PLSD Fisher), MF-Exp.

Fig. 5. Effect of the moisture content on the number of RC/cm2 (ANOVA and test PLSD
Fisher), OFP-exp.

appears as a good estimate of the moisture content of wood. These
results are in agreement with those of Prior and Alvin (1986).
The results of the furnace experiments also point at the effect of
the heating temperature on the number of RC, which increased
proportionally with the increase in temperature. However, this
parameter was probably overestimated by our protocol, since the
samples were introduced inside the furnace once the respective
temperatures were reached. Consequently, a thermal shock was
produced that is quite an unnatural phenomenon in open-air
combustion structures. The effect of temperature might therefore
be more relevant for the study of craft structures such as charcoal
kilns, inside which temperatures are more conﬁned and stable.
Nevertheless, this parameter inﬂuences less the mean number of
RC/cm2 than moisture. This indicates that, in archaeological
contexts, the type of structure in which the combustion process
takes place does have an effect on the mean number of RC, but one
which is far less relevant than the wood moisture content prior to
charring.

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

Thus, the size of the radial cracks seems to constitute a good
criterion for the discrimination of green and seasoned wood when
tested on samples charred in the furnace, but appears invalid for
the characterisation of pieces of charcoal from open-air ﬁreplaces.
The heterogeneous intrinsic and extrinsic carbonisation conditions
in open-air structures together with the morphology of the slices
are probably responsible for those differences. Since they are closer
to archaeological contexts, a comparison with archaeological
samples should be based on the results of experiments carried out
in open-air structures.
In the open-air combustion, the mean number of RC/cm2
allowed the statistical discrimination of seasoned from green pine
wood, ranging from 1.4 to 2.5 RC/cm2 on seasoned wood and from
6.8 to 8.2 RC/cm2 on green wood. Calculating the mean number of
RC/cm2 in an archaeological sample would allow discriminating
seasoned from green pine wood. However, the transposal of this
method to archaeological contexts should be done carefully. The
ﬁrst issue concerns possible ways of interpreting the middle value
of the mean number of RC/cm2: as a mixture of green and seasoned
wood in a same ﬁre or as successive combustions in the same
structure? Moreover, successive archaeological deposits, overlapping ﬁreplaces and charcoal mixtures in the same level tend to
interfere with our interpretations. What we regard as the result of
one practice (e.g. the use of green wood for a speciﬁc activity) is
frequently an average representation of multiple/successive practices. Where possible, it is therefore fundamental to distinguish two
types of depositional contexts: (i) easily identiﬁable, concentrated
deposits related to a speciﬁc activity (e.g. charcoal from ﬁreplaces,
kilns or other structures), for which the fuel used may allow documenting the thermal speciﬁcities of the structure (e.g. smoking or
fumigation); (ii) ‘synthetic’ deposits, i.e. scattered charcoal in the
archaeological layer, resulting from long-term deposition and
mixing, difﬁcult to link precisely to speciﬁc activities, but with
a reliable signiﬁcance concerning the environment (Chabal, 1997;
Asouti and Austin, 2005; Théry-Parisot et al., 2010).
6. Conclusions
The study of radial cracks on the transversal section of experimental samples (P. sylvestris) obtained both in a mufﬂe furnace and
an open-air structure allows proposing a method for identifying the
combustion of green wood in archaeological samples.
We demonstrated that the occurrence of radial cracks is not
correlated with the moisture content. Therefore, the percentage of
radial cracks in an archaeological sample is not a relevant indicator
of the combustion of green wood in ancient hearths. Nevertheless,
the number of RC/cm2 allowed discriminating seasoned wood from
green wood. Even though the phenomenon is less important in
open-air conditions, the mean number of RC/cm2 appears as a good
estimate of the moisture content of wood, with respectively 34 RC/
cm2 and 8 RC/cm2 on green wood and 3.4 RC/cm2 and 2 RC/cm2 on
seasoned wood (in the mufﬂe furnace and open-air structure,
respectively). Calculating the mean number of RC/cm2 in an
archaeological sample would allow discriminating seasoned from
green pine wood.
However, other issues have to be addressed. Considering that
archaeological pieces of charcoal are generally smaller than 4 cm,
can the same method be applied to smaller pieces; or to other
species of pine; or, more generally, to other gymnosperms and
angiosperms? A similar study currently developed for Argentinean
woods tends to conﬁrm our results: the mean number of RC/cm2
allows discriminating the combustion of green from that of
seasoned wood (Caruso Fermé and Théry-Parisot, 2011). Further
experiments have to be conducted, mainly in order to take into
account (i) differential behaviour from one species to another and

387

(ii) other aspects pertaining to the size and state of wood before
combustion (e.g. altered/rotten wood, driftwood). When fully
developed, this method will allow us to attest the combustion of
green wood in archaeological contexts, and to reconstitute past
activities related to ﬁre and the use of hearths.
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to Raul Carstocea and Clark Warren for their
helpful corrections of the manuscript.
References
Alix, C., Brewster, K., 2004. Not all driftwood is created equal: wood use and value
along the Yukon and Kuskowim Rivers, Alaska. Alaska Journal of Anthropology
2 (1), 2e19.
Asouti, E., Austin, P., 2005. Reconstructing woodland vegetation and its exploitation
by past societies, based on the analysis and interpretation of archaeological
wood charcoal macro-remains. Environmental Archaeology 10 (1), 1e18.
Avat, F., 1991. Contribution à l’étude des traitements thermiques du bois
(20e300  C): transformations chimiques et caractérisations physico-chimiques.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Ecole Normale Supérieure des Mines de Paris.
Beall, F.C., Blankenhorn, P.R., Moore, G.R., 1974. Carbonized wood-physical properties and use as a SEM preparation. Wood and Science 6 (3), 212e219.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., 2008. Morphological, chemical and physical changes during
charcoaliﬁcation of wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts. Journal
of Archaeological Science 35 (9), 2434e2445.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., Van Brussel, A.A., 2009. Preservation potential of charcoal in
alkaline environments: an experimental approach and implications for the
archaeological record. Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (8), 1672e1679.
Caruso Fermé, L., Théry-Parisot, I., 2011. Experimentation and combustion properties of Patagonian Andean wood. SAGVNTVM EXTRA 11, 39e40.
Chabal, L., 1997. Forêts et sociétés en Languedoc (Néolihique ﬁnal, Antiquité tardive). L’anthracologie, méthode et paléoécologie. DAF 63, Editions de la Maison
des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris, 189 p.
Cutter, B.E., Cumbie, B.G., Mac Ginnes, E.A., 1980. SEM and shrinkage analyses of
southern pine wood following pyrolis. Wood Science and Technology 14,
115e130.
Henry, A., 2011. Paléoenvironnements et gestion du bois de feu au Mésolithique
dans le sud-ouest de la France: anthracologie, ethno-archéologie et expérimentation. Unpublished Ph.D., Université de Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, 2 vol.,
441 p.
Henry, A., Théry-Parisot, I., Voronkova, E., 2009. La gestion du bois de feu en forêt
boréale: problématique archéo-anthracologique et étude d’un cas ethnographique
(Région de l’Amour, Sibérie). In: Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Henry, A. (Eds.),
Fuel Management During the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic Period. New Tools, New
Interpretations. BAR Int. Se. 1914. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 17e37.
Kumar, R.R., Kolar, A.K., Leckner, B., 2006. Shrinkage characteristics of Casuarina
wood during devolatilization in a ﬂuidized bed combustor. Biomass and Bioenergy 30 (2), 153e165.
Mac Ginnes, E.A., Kandel, S.A., Szopa, P.S., 1971. Some structural changes observed in
the structure of wood. Wood and Fiber Science 3 (2), 77e83.
Marguerie, D., Hunot, J.Y., 2007. Charcoal analysis and dendrology: data from
archaeological sites in north-western France. Journal of Archaeological Science
34 (9), 1417e1433.
McParland, L.C., Collinson, M.E., Scott, A.C., Steart, D.C., Grassineau, N.V.,
Gibbons, S.J., 2007. Ferns and ﬁres: experimental charring of ferns compared to
wood and implications for palaeobiology, palaeoecology, coal petrology, and
isotope geochemistry. PALAIOS 22 (5), 528e538.
McParland, L.C., Collinson, M.E., Scott, A.C., Campbell, G., 2009. The use of reﬂectance values for the interpretation of natural and anthropogenic charcoal
assemblages. Archaeological and Anthropological Science 1, 249e261.
McParland, L.C., Collinson, M.E., Scott, A.C., Campbell, G., Veal, R., 2010. Is vitriﬁcation in charcoal a result of high temperature burning of wood? Journal of
Archaeological Science 37 (10), 2679e2687.
Moore, G.R., Blankenhorn, P.R., Beall, F.C., Kline, D., 1974. Some physical properties of
birch carbonized in a nitrogen atmosphere. Wood and Fiber Science 6 (3),193e199.
Moskal-del Hoyo, M., Wachowiak, M., Blanchette, R.A., 2010. Preservation of fungi
in archaeological charcoal. Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (9), 2106e2116.
Pastor-Villegas, J., Meneses Rodríguez, J.M., Pastor-Valle, J.F., García García, M., 2007.
Changes in commercial wood charcoal by thermal treatments. Journal of
Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 80 (2), 507e514.
Prior, J., Alvin, K.L., 1983. Structural changes on charring woods of Dichrostachys
and Salix from Southern Africa. IAWA Journal 4, 197e206.
Prior, J., Alvin, K.L., 1986. Structural changes on charring woods of Dichrostachis and
Salix from Southern Africa: the effect of moisture content. IAWA Journal 7 (3),
243e249.
Prior, J., Gasson, P., 1993. Anatomical changes on charring six African hardwoods.
IAWA Journal 14, 77e86.
Rossen, J., Olson, J., 1985. The controlled carbonisation and archaeological analysis
of SE U.S. wood charcoals. Journal of Field Archaeology 12, 445e456.

388

I. Théry-Parisot, A. Henry / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 381e388

Schweingrüber, F.H., 1978. In: Zurcher, A.G. (Ed.), Anatomie microscopique du bois.
Institut fédéral de Recherche Forestière.
Scott, A.C., 2010. Charcoal recognition, taphonomy and uses in palaeoenvironmental
analysis. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 291 (1e2), 11e39.
Scott, A.C., Cripps, J.A., Collinson, M.E., Nichols, G., 2000. The taphonomy of charcoal
following a recent heathland ﬁre and some implications for the interpretation
of fossil charcoal deposits. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
164 (1e4), 1e31.
Slocum, D.H., Mac Ginnis, E.A., Beall, F.C., 1978. Charcoal yield, shrinkage, and
density changes during carbonization of oak and hickory woods. Wood Science
11 (1), 42e47.
Stimely, G.L., Blankenhorn, P.R., 1985. Effects of species, specimen size, and heating
rate on char yield and fuel properties. Wood and Fiber Science 17 (4), 477e489.
Théry, I., Gril, J., Meignen, L., Vernet, J.L., Maury, J., 1996. Coal used for fuel at two
prehistoric sites in Southern France: Les Canalettes and Les Usclades. Journal of
Archaeological Science 23, 509e512.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2001. Economie des combustibles au Paléolithique. Expérimentation, anthracologie, Taphonomie. Dossier de Documentation Archéologique n
20, CNRS-Editions, 195 p.

Théry-Parisot, I., 2002. Gathering of ﬁrewood during the Palaeolithic. In:
Thiébault, S. (Ed.), Charcoal Analysis. Methodological Approaches, Palaeoecological Results and Wood Uses. BAR Int. Se. 1063. Archaeopress, Oxford,
pp. 243e249.
Théry-Parisot, I., Texier, P.J., 2006. L’utilisation du bois mort dans le site moustérien
de la Combette (Vaucluse). Apport d’une approche morphométrique des charbons de bois à la déﬁnition des fonctions de site, au Paléolithique. Bulletin de la
Société Préhistorique Française 103 (3), 453e463.
Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Chrazvzez, J., 2010. Anthracology and taphonomy, from
wood gathering to charcoal analysis. A review of the taphonomic processes
modifying charcoal assemblages. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 291, 142e153.
Thinon, M., 1992. L’analyse pédoanthracologique: aspects méthodologiques et
applications. thèse ès-sciences, Unpublished PhD, University of Aix-Marseille 3,
317 p.
Thuvander, F., Berglung, L.A., 2000. In situ observations of fracture mechanisms for
radial cracks in wood. Journal of Materials Science 35, 6277e6283.
Zicherman, J.B., 1981. Microstructure of wood char. Wood Science and Technology
15, 237e249.

