Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Fuel, Fire and Heat: an experimental approach to highlight the potential of
studying ash and char remains from archaeological contexts
Freek Braadbaart a, b, *, Imogen Poole c, Hans D.J. Huisman d, e, Bertil van Os d
a

Department of Earth Sciences-Geochemistry, Faculty of Geosciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80021, 3058 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands
Faculty of Science, Institute of Biology, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9505, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
c
School of Geosciences, Geology and Petroleum Geology, University of Aberdeen, King’s College, Aberdeen, AB24 3FX, Scotland, UK
d
Cultural Heritage Agency, P.O. Box 1600, 3800 BP Amersfoort, The Netherlands
e
Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9500, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 18 November 2010
Received in revised form
11 March 2011
Accepted 10 October 2011

As in traditional societies today ancient societies probably selected different fuels to meet speciﬁc heat
requirements. Char and ash, the end products of ﬁre, are often found in abundance in archaeological
contexts. These end products can provide information regarding (i) the original fuel resource and type,
(ii) the characteristics of the ﬁre and (iii) combined with other archaeological evidence shed further light
on possible socio-economic activity(-ies) associated with that ﬁre. The three main fuel resources would
have been (i) modern vegetation, (ii) fossil fuel and (iii) animal by-products. Local availability and
abundance would have inﬂuenced the choice made.
In this study an experimental approach was adopted to try and distinguish between the three different
fuel resources that are known to have been used by ancient societies (and continue to be used by
traditional societies today) from their char and ash remains to help determine original fuel-type and
understand the relative heating properties. For this end one fuel-type from each fuel resource listed
above, namely wood, peat and cow dung, was chosen.
Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Fire
Heat
Fuel
Combustion
Wood
Peat
Dung
Ash
Char
Reﬂectance
Phytoliths
Archaeobotany

1. Introduction
Direct generation of heat, through combustion and release of
stored energy in a fuel, can be considered to be one of the most
important technological advances. For ancient societies ﬁre was the
controlled means by which this energy could be released and the
fuel needed for such heat generation would have been carbon-rich,
organic material. The fuel would have originated from one of three
main resources, namely (i) modern vegetation, (ii) fossil fuel or (iii)
animal by-products. Wood is an obvious example of a fuel-type
obtained from a modern vegetation resource, but today in regions
where wood is limiting other carbon-rich fuel-types, such as turf,
seaweed and agricultural rest products such as harvest residues are
used. In addition fossil fuels, including peat, and animal by-product

* Corresponding author. Department of Earth Sciences-Geochemistry, Faculty of
Geosciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80021, 3058 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands.
E-mail address: brabra@wxs.nl (F. Braadbaart).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2011.10.009

fuels, including fat (blubber) and dung, can also be used (e.g.
Church et al., 2007; Samuel, 1989; Shahack-Gross, 2011). Therefore
in all likelihood ancient societies also utilised fuel-types from
different fuel-categories for the same reason. Most published
literature focusing on fuels from the archaeological record is
restricted to one fuel-type from one fuel resource (e.g. modern
vegetation: Théry-Parisot et al., 2010; Out, 2009; Albert et al., 2000,
2008; fossil: Branigan et al., 2002; animal by-products: Matthews,
2010; Miller, 1984; Shahack-Gross, 2011; Shahack-Gross et al.,
2005), rather than a direct comparison between fuel-types from
different resources, their distinguishing properties and implications for the archaeological context.
This study focuses on the comparative differences between
three fuels, one from each fuel resource in order to determine
(i) the means by which fuel-types from different resources can be
distinguished in archaeological contexts, and (ii) the possible social
reasoning behind the selection of one fuel-type over another
(Matthews, 2010) to enhance and facilitate a greater understanding
of the archaeological contexts in which ﬁre remains are found. For

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

this purpose three different experiments were performed on three
different fuel-types, one from each resource, and the results
compared. First an overview is provided at to what is meant by the
combustion process of a fuel and how the aims of this study can be
realised.
Combustion is the process by which matter burns. To initiate
combustion an interaction has to take place between the fuel, the
air (oxygen) and the heat from an external heat source e the three
basic elements of the ﬁre triangle (Emmons and Atreya, 1982). If
one of these elements is missing, no ﬁre is possible. Once a heat
source has been introduced to the fuel, heat is absorbed (endothermic phase) and the heated fuel begins to increase in temperature. Once a temperature of 280e300  C is reached a chemical
process starts that leads to the thermal degradation of the organic
components (Shaﬁzadeh, 1981; Braadbaart and Poole, 2008)
producing volatile gases and a carbonaceous residue. The presence
of air (oxygen) enables both newly formed products to oxidize and
as a result the heat-generating (exothermic) phase can begin. The
volatile gases will produce ﬂames and release heat thereby representing the most recognizable and signiﬁcant part of a ﬁre e the
ﬂaming combustion phase. The properties of the carbonaceous
residue relate to both the heating conditions and the properties of
the original fuel but are usually highly reactive and porous, which
facilitates oxidation and in turn also releases its potential energy.
Two further combustion phases can be distinguished in the
generation of heat from a fuel: the smouldering phase and the
glowing phase. The smouldering phase is characterised by the lack
of ﬂames and much smoke and is associated with conditions where
oxygen is limited such as in tightly packed fuels (e.g. peat or dung).
The glowing phase is characterized by a yellow glow and no smoke
and only embers are visible. When enough air and heat are available the carbonaceous residue, as well as the volatile gases, will
undergo complete combustion producing an ash end product. The
ash contains the incombustible, inorganic compounds present in
the original fuel, such as the minerals calcium, potassium and silica
and their oxides and carbonates.
When oxygen and/or the external heat source are limited and
temperatures drop to below 300  C any further combustion or
thermal degradation of the fuel constituents is prevented and the
ﬁre becomes extinguished. A black carbonaceous residue of
incompletely- and non-combusted organic material usually referred to as char, result (Braadbaart and Poole, 2008). Char can be
deﬁned as the solid carbonaceous residue that remains after the
volatile gases are released from solid organic material during its
initial stage of heating. Such residues are termed charcoal if the
original fuel-type was wood. For all other organic residues the
name of the original material has to be added to clarify the type of
char (e.g. grass char, peat char, wheat grain char etc.).
Purposeful thermal degradation in the absence of air, a process
usually referred to as carbonisation or pyrolysis, can also be used to
produce a char fuel (e.g. charcoal), as the carbon content, and thus
caloriﬁc value, increases signiﬁcantly. The heat generated from char
produced in this way is around 50% higher than its original
biomass. It has even been suggested that this new type of fuel was
the ﬁrst synthetic material produced by humans and its ancestors
(Antal and Grønli, 2003).
The ash and char remains provide the only indication of the
original fuel-type and thus its resource. Since both ash and char are
frequently recovered from archaeological contexts and the fueltype has the potential to provide further insights into the workings of an ancient society, an investigation was conducted into the
structural, physical and elemental properties of one fuel-type
(i.e. wood, peat and cow dung) from each of the three main
fuel-categories. Studies of the organic and inorganic residues, both
visible and invisible to the naked eye, help illustrate this potential

837

source of data within the ash and char remains preserved within
archaeological contexts that can help further understanding of past
human behaviour not only in terms of fuel selection, but also the
basis on which a society may have selected a particular fuel-type, as
well as providing information pertaining to the relative level of
generation, control and application of heat (pyrotechnology) used
in past societies. This is important as the degree of (pyro)technology afforded by one society over another is taken as a measure
of the level or quality of civilisation of that society (Goudsblom,
1992; Mumford, 1963).
2. Material
Three fuel-types from different fuel resources were used for the
experiments: wood fuel-type from a modern vegetation fuel
resource, peat fuel-type from a fossil fuel resource, and cow grass
dung from an animal by-product fuel resource.
Wood samples, at least 10 cm in diameter, had been air-dried for
about one year and were obtained from the existing stock at the
Schothorst Early Medieval Farm (Amersfoort, the Netherlands).
Peat was collected from the Meerstalblok, the central part of the
bog reserve at Bargerveen (located southeast of Emmen in the
north-eastern part of the Netherlands) where peat has been cultivated and cut for centuries (Boon et al., 1986). The peat samples
were air-dried for one month prior to use.
Dung from Galloway cows, air-dried for one month, was
collected in the spring of 2008 from the farm at the Medieval Yard
Schothorst (which forms part of the Centre for Nature- and
Environmental Education on the Schothorst Estate, near Amersfoort). This farm practices traditional medieval animal husbandry
where, in spring and summer, the cows graze on meadow grass.
Mineral supplements are only given when absolutely necessary
and then in very small quantities. The cow dung is therefore grass
derived as opposed to being derived from a more varied vegetation which would have been the case had the cows been able to
roam freely.
3. Methods
3.1. Analyses of the original fuel types
3.1.1. Structure
The morphological structure of each fuel was examined by
incident light microscopy using a Zeiss Axioskop microscope.
3.1.2. Water and ash content
Water and ash content of the three fuels were measured on the
Thermogrametric Analyser TGA 2950 Hi-res. The carrier gas was air
and the heating rate was set at 25  C min1. The water content was
determined at 105  C and ash content at 950  C.
3.1.3. Molecular analyses
The molecular composition of the fuels was investigated using
direct temperature-resolved mass spectrometry (DTMS) under
electron ionization (EI) conditions with a JEOL SX-102A double
focusing mass spectrometer (B/E) with a direct inserted probe
equipped with a Pt/Rh (9/1) ﬁlament. For further details see
Braadbaart (2004).
3.2. Heating properties of the investigated fuels
Experiments were performed in the summer of 2008 in Schothorst using the existing hearth situated inside the building of the
Early Medieval farm. The hearth had a base of clay on to which
stones were placed to form a circle with a diameter of 80 cm. In this

838

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

way the inﬂuence of extrinsic conditions was kept to an absolute
minimum whilst retaining the authenticity of the experimental
set-up. To determine the degree of variability with regard to the
extrinsic conditions within the farm building three initial experiments were performed on different days at different ambient
temperatures. Peat was used to bring 3 L water to the boil in the
kettle later used for the Water Boiling Test (see Section 3.2.1). The
mean time taken for the water to reach boiling point was 35.7 min
(SD ¼ 0.7) consuming a mean mass of peat of 910 g (SD ¼ 22.4) with
95% conﬁdence intervals. To ensure experimental consistency we
made sure that subsequent experiments met these conﬁdence
limits.
3.2.1. Water Boiling Test
To compare the heating qualities of the three fuels an adaptation
of the standard Water Boiling Test (VITA, 1985) was used. For each
fuel-type a ﬁre was laid using small specimens of each fuel in the
clay hearth inside the Medieval farm house. The ﬁre was lit by
introducing a lighted match to the fuel. As soon as a steady ﬁre was
established with a temperature of around 600  C an iron kettle ﬁlled
with 3 liters (L) of water was hung over at a height of 20 cm above
the base of the hearth and a set of three experiments was then
performed. For each experiment the following were recorded:
(i) The time in minutes and mass in grams (g) of the fuel subsequently needed to bring the water in the kettle to boiling point; (ii)
once boiling point had been reached, the mass of fuel (g) needed to
keep the water simmering for 60 minutes; (iii) the minimum
amount of fuel (g) necessary to keep the ﬁre alight for a further
60 minutes. The maximum temperature reached within each ﬁre
was measured using a handheld MERA KJ-12 thermometer equipped with a K-type thermocouple. After the Water Boiling Test (WBT)
had been undertaken the ﬁre was left to self-extinguish and the ash
and char remains from each fuel were collected for further study.
3.3. Analyses of the different ash residues
3.3.1. Structure
Thin sections of each ash residue were made by mixing the ash,
with as much char residue removed as possible, of each fuel with
resin (Araldite 2020A and as hardener 2020B) and leaving it to set
for 48 hours. The sections were then polished to a thickness of
30 mm and studied using a Zeiss Axioskop 40 microscope. For
a more detailed observation of phytoliths and calcium-oxalate
crystals, ash samples were mixed with little water, mounted on
glass slides and examined using trans-illumination under a NikonOptiphot2 microscope.
3.3.2. Granulometry
The particle size distribution of each ash sample was determined by laser diffraction (Malvern Mastersizer 2000 coupled with
a Hydro 2000G inlet). The particles larger than 2000 mm were
removed and the particle size distribution range was measured
between 0.1 and 2000 mm. Each ash residue was measured as
recovered from the ﬁreplace (i.e. untreated) and again after treatment with 10% HCl and 30% H2O2, whereby calcium carbonate and
organic material were removed.
3.3.3. pH and elemental analysis
The pH for each of the three ash residues was measured
following the speciﬁcations outlined in NEN 5750, 1989. Subsequently the chemical composition of each ash residue was
measured using a handheld XRF Thermo Scientiﬁc Niton XL3t
device with GOLDD detector equipped with a silver anode operating at a maximum of 50 kV and 40 uA. This device is well suited
for the measurement of up to 25 elements simultaneously in the

analytical range between magnesium (atomic number 12) and
uranium (atomic number 92). Light elements (magnesium,
aluminium, silica and phosphorous) were measured using a helium
purge. The samples were measured in bulk mode (mining programme). The device was factory calibrated and further soil
standards were also measured.
3.4. Properties of the different char residues
3.4.1. Structure
From each char residue 3 randomly selected samples were
embedded in resin and polished in accordance with standard
methods deﬁned in ISO 7404, part 2 (1985). The structural
morphology of these samples was then examined under reﬂected
light and oil immersion using a Leitz motorized DMLA microscope
equipped with a xyz-stage and a Basler video camera.
3.4.2. Reﬂectance
In order to determine the temperature to which each char
specimen had been subject within each ﬁre, reﬂectance measurements were performed on the three char samples embedded in
resin and polished as described in 3.4.1. (see Braadbaart and Poole,
2008 for details). Reﬂectance was measured under oil immersion at
a wavelength of 546 nm using the above described Leitz microscope. For each sample a total of at least 100 randomly performed
reﬂectance readings were taken (to obtain a statistically acceptable
population) and the mean reﬂectance calculated. Reﬂectance
measurements were performed in accordance with standard
methods deﬁned in ISO 7404, part 5 (1994). The temperatures
derived from the measurements were then compared with
the temperatures attained within each ﬁre as measured by the
handheld MERA KJ-12 thermometer equipped with a K-type
thermocouple.
4. Results
4.1. Analyses of the original fuel types
4.1.1. Structure
The wood fuel from Schothorst farm was identiﬁed from its
anatomy as oak (Quercus sp.). The sample of peat collected from
Bargerveen was brown in colour and comprised partially decomposed plant material that included leaves of Erica tetralis, ﬁbres of
Eriophorum vaginatum, sclerenchymatous ﬁbres and ericaceous
rootlets. No evidence of moss was observed. The cow dung from
Schothorst comprised partly decomposed grass ﬁbres (>90%) with
many hairs running through it.
4.1.2. Water and ash content
The water content of the oak wood sample after one year of air
drying was 9.21 wt% (Table 1). The water content of the fresh
samples of peat and cow dung were naturally higher, with that of
peat being 35.3 wt% and cow dung 49.3 wt%. After one month of air
drying the water content of both had fallen to 12.4 wt% and 7.9 wt%
for peat and cow dung respectively.

Table 1
Water and ash content of fuels used in the experiments.
Fuel type

Collection date

H2O
(wt%)

Combustion
date

H2O
(wt%)

Ash
(wt%)

Wood
Peat
Cow dung

15e07e2008
21e07e2008
02e06e2008

9.21a
35.3
49.3

18e08e2008
22e08e2008
28e08e2008

9.21a
12.4
7.9

0.9
1.3
33.9

a

Same values as sample was already air dry.

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

The ash content of both the wood and peat samples was in the
order of 1 wt% whereas the cow dung sample had a much higher
ash content of 33.9 wt% (Table 1).
4.1.3. Molecular analysis
The DTMS-EI spectra of the untreated samples of the three fuels
show an almost identical ion distribution representing the characteristic mass peaks of polysaccharides and lignin (Fig. 1). Mass
peaks m/z 43, 57, 60, 73, 98, 126 and 144 are derived from hexosugars (cellulose) and m/z 85 and 114 from pentosugars (hemicelluloses) (Pouwels et al., 1989). The main lignin markers in the
three spectra are the monomeric guaiacyl units m/z 124, 137, 150,
151, 178, 180 and the syringyl units m/z 154, 167, 180, 194, 208, 210
(van der Hage et al., 1993). The main mass peaks are assigned to

100

28

a

60

73
43

50

57
85
210

114

98

4.2. Analyses of the different ash residues

100

200

300

m/z

b

60
73
44
57

50
98 110
85

126

114
144
180
210

0
100

200

300

m/z

c

43
73
85

114

60
50

4.1.4. Water Boiling Tests
The temperature within each of the ﬁres made with the three
different fuel-types ranged from w400  C at the very edge of the
ﬁre to 600  C in the centre. The maximum temperature within each
ﬁre, as measured by the handheld thermometer equipped with
a thermocouple, was w800  C regardless of fuel-type (Table 2), but
this temperature was transitory. The peat and cow dung ﬁres were
characterized by the release of much more smoke relative to the
wood ﬁre with the cow dung ﬁre producing copious quantities of
dark grey smoke.
The results from the Water Boiling Tests show that the time
needed to bring the water to the boil using wood took 20 minutes
as compared with 35 minutes when using peat and cow dung
(Table 2). Less wood fuel was needed (740 g) relative to peat (915 g)
or cow dung (1100 g). It is noted that the results for peat comply
with the 95% intervals calculated from the initial experiments.
More wood and cow dung fuel was needed to keep the water
simmering for 1 hour relative to the peat. Compared with peat
(300 g) it took more than twice as much wood (660 g) and cow
dung (500 g) to keep the ﬁre going for 60 minutes.

167

0

100

coniferyl alcohol (m/z 180) and sinapyl alcohol (m/z 210). The
presence of mass peaks of polyphenols (m/z 94, 110, 120, 150) in the
sample of peat (Fig. 1b) is related to other degradation products of
lignin (Boon et al., 1986).

180
126 144
137

100

839

98

4.2.1. Structure of thin sections
Thin section photos are presented in Fig. 2. Wood ash contains
many colourless, transparent to cloudy translucent ﬁne, irregular
angular grains and concretions (Fig. 2a). When viewed using cross
polarized light these bodies undergo higher-order birefringence
with colours typical of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Some of the
minerals are also seen to form micritic pseudomorphs after calcium
oxalates (CaC2O2$2H2O) where the original oxalates have been
converted, by heating, into carbonates whilst retaining the shape of
the original oxalates (c.f. Brochier and Thinon, 2003, Fig. 2b). In
addition, a large number of calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium
oxalate can be recognized in bundles that are tentatively attributed
to sclerenchymatous ﬁbres (Fig. 2c). In some cases, the colour of the
minerals in the pseudomorphs has obtained a brownish hue,
probably due to iron staining or deposits of char on the minerals.
Sporadically, some carbonized tissue fragments are still associated
with the calcium minerals. Also associated with these fragments of
calcium minerals are globular shapes that may have resulted from
gas exudation during combustion (Fig. 2d). Occasionally other
birefringence colours can be seen associated with minerals
centered around globular spaces (bubbles or pores) indicating the
presence of minerals other than carbonates. For example concretions indicating the presence of calcium hydroxide, or the yellow
minerals with brownish or greenish hues with birefringence

126
Table 2
Maximum temperature recorded within each ﬁre as determined from the handheld
thermometer and the results of the Water Boiling Test for the three fuel samples
(for details see text).

137
150

180
167 194

210

0
100

200

300

m/z
Fig. 1. DTMS-EI spectra showing the characteristic mass peaks (m/z) for lignin and
polysaccharides (for details see text); a. wood; b. peat; c. cow dung.

Maximum temperature reached in the ﬁre( C)
Time taken (minutes) to bring 3 l of water to the boil
Fuel consumption (g) to bring 3 l water to the boil
Fuel consumption (g) for 60 minutes simmering
Fuel consumption (g) to keep ﬁre alight for 60 minutes

Wood

Peat

Cow
dung

800
20
740
1550
660

800
35
915
1300
300

800
35
1100
1300
520

840

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

Fig. 2. Micrographs of the different ash types using plain polarized light (PPL); a. Wood ash with ﬁne grained carbonate crystals, scale bar ¼ 100 mm; b. Wood ash showing lozenge
shaped calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium oxalates (arrow), scale bar ¼ 100 mm; c. Wood ash showing many calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium oxalates in bundles of tissue with
often dark brown hue, scale bar ¼ 200 mm; d. Wood ash with globular shapes in calcium carbonate, probably caused by gas exudation during combustion (arrows), scale
bar ¼ 500 mm; e. Peat ash showing calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium oxalates (arrows) in bundles of tissue, scale bar ¼ 50 mm; f. Peat ash showing fragments of silica phytoliths
(arrow), scale bar ¼ 50 mm; g. Cow dung ash showing silica phytoliths (arrows), scale bar ¼ 100 mm; h. Prickles in cow dung ash with the second inserted at right angles to the ﬁrst,
scale bar ¼ 50 mm (photograph by Pearsall).

colours that are white to light blue under crossed polarized light
indicative of calcium phosphate. No silica phytoliths have been
observed.
In many ways the structure of peat ash appears very similar to
the wood ash sample with the dominance of calcitic pseudomorphs
of calcium oxalates, as determined from birefringence (Fig. 2e).

They are also concentrated in similar bundles as identiﬁed in wood
ash. An important difference with wood ash is the presence of silica
phytoliths (Fig. 2f). They are determined from their shape, clear
colour, translucence and lack of birefringence (although some
phytoliths show faint golden phosphorescence under blue light).
Sand grains (quartz) can also be recognized in the peat ash.

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

In contrast ash from cow dung was distinctively different from
that of the wood and peat. The cow dung ash consisted mostly of
ﬁne biogenic silicates and quartz sand. The biogenic silicates are
colorless to slightly yellowish or brown, and show no birefringence
under cross-polarized light (Fig. 2g). Although they appear transformed, these biogenic silicates are recognizable from their shape
as being phytoliths (cf. Madella et al., 2005; Delhon et al., 2008).
Some seemed to be amassed into sub linear wavy lines whilst
others occur as amorphous material cementing quartz sand grains
together or attached to charred plant remains. The presence of an
axis with two thorns attached in the cow dung is also noteworthy
(Fig. 2h). Calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium oxalates as well as
spherulites have not been observed in cow dung ash.
4.2.2. Granulometry
The results of the ash particle size distribution in both untreated
and treated dung samples are shown as cumulative granulometric
curves (Fig. 3). Each ash sample is represented by a sigmoidal curve.
Differences can be seen between the samples, for example the silt
part (2e50 mm) of untreated ash samples varies from 45% for wood
to 65% for peat. After treatment the silt component of the ash
samples decreases to 25% and 45% for wood and peat respectively.
Cow dung ash remains more or less stable with 52% silt in the
untreated sample and 45% for the treated sample.
4.2.3. pH and elemental analysis
The pH measurements for all three ash residues were found to
be strongly alkaline with a pH of 11.95, 11.60 and 10.25 for the wood
ash, peat ash and cow dung ash respectively.
The results of the elemental analyses of the three types of ash
are presented in Table 3. The main essential element in all ash
residues is calcium (Ca), followed by magnesium (Mg) and potassium (K). Cow dung is distinctive in the overriding abundance of
silica (Si) and its lower calcium content. Silica is also relatively high
in peat and wood ash but not as dominant as calcium. Peat ash has
higher proportions of aluminium and iron than either wood ash or
cow dung ash.

841

Table 3
Elemental composition of ash derived from fuels from the present experiments,
heated in the range of 400e800  C.
Element

Fuel type

Ca
Mg
K
Al
Fe
P
Si

Wood

Peat

Cow dung

23.0
1.5
5.0
0.6
0.5
2.6
7.0

20.0
6.2
4.4
1.8
1.1
2.3
6.0

4.8
1.4
1.1
0.8
0.5
4.5
33.5

of the original wood (Fig. 4a and b), but are distinguished from the
original wood sample by the carbonised cell walls, which have
become reﬂective.
The peat char sample also appears black and can be easily
broken by hand, but relative to charcoal it is lighter in weight and
more friable. Under reﬂected light (Fig. 4c and d) it is characterized
by a compact white reﬂective groundmass comprising carbonized,
partly decomposed, plant material. Identiﬁable carbonized plant
material is visible and comprises carbonized cell walls. In the
middle of Fig. 4d a cross section of a possible root structure is visible
around a central void. Cow dung char is also black and friable.
Under reﬂected light (Fig. 4e and f) it looks very similar to that of
peat char with plant material appearing randomly throughout but
does appear less consolidated relative to the peat char. The
groundmass is also reﬂective. Fresh or partly decomposed plant
material, including the white carbonised cell walls, can be recognised. Some characteristic structures (Fig. 4f, arrow) are observed,
which are tentatively attributed to carbonised hairs.
4.3.2. Reﬂectance
The mean reﬂectance values of the three char samples range
from 3.7 %Ro for the cow dung, 4.22 %Ro for the wood and 5.1 %Ro for
the peat (Table 4). These values correspond to temperatures in the
range of 600e700  C according to the reﬂectance curves of
Braadbaart and Poole (2008).

4.3. Properties of the different char residues
5. Discussion
4.3.1. Structure
The charcoal samples are black, light in weight and friable.
Viewed under reﬂected light they retain the anatomy characteristic

Ash and char are the visible remains of fuels used by ancient
societies to provide themselves with heat from ﬁres, although the

■ wood treated

100

c
cumulativ
ve (%)

90
80
70

▲ peat

treated

● cow dung treated
□ wood untreated
Δ peat untreated
○ cow dung untreated
+ wood ash (Brochier, 1983)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1

10

μm

100

1000

Fig. 3. Granulometric curves for untreated and treated ashes from wood, peat and cow dung. Note the difference between the shape of the curve of wood ash from Brochier and the
curves of wood ash from the present experiments.

842

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

Fig. 4. Micrographs of char structures under reﬂected light, scale bars ¼ 60 mm; a and b charcoal showing the regular arrangement of reﬂective cell walls and relatively open
structure; c and d peat char with the more compact structure with the reﬂective cell walls of plant remains still present within; e and f cow dung char also showing a compacted
structure with reﬂective cell walls of plant remains and hair (arrowed).

presence of ash may not always visible with the naked eye. These
remains can preserve information regarding not only the fuel-type
selected and from which particular resource, but also hints to the
underlying reason why that society may have selected that
particular fuel. Therefore this study investigated: (i) the characteristics of the ash and carbonaceous residues as a means to
distinguish between the original fuel resource, and (ii) the
Table 4
Mean reﬂectance measurements (%Ro) on 3 specimens of the chars of each fuel
derived from calibration curves of Braadbaart and Poole (2008).
Fuel

%Ro (mean)

Standard
deviation

Number of
measurements

Temperature
( C)

Wood
Peat
Cow dung

4.219
5.103
3.759

0.330
0.193
0.348

300
170
160

640
700
600

properties of these residues as a means to elucidate a greater
understanding of fuel resource selection by ancient societies.
Together the information helps to reveal facets about an ancient
society that might otherwise be lost.
5.1. Fuel
Fuel is composed of water, an inorganic ash fraction and an
organic (cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin) fraction. It is the
organic fraction that provides the potential energy that can be
transformed into the required heat energy. The energy content of
a fuel is measured in Joules (J) and can be deﬁned as the total
amount of heat produced during complete combustion. The total
amount of heat available per unit mass (kg) of fuel is the gross
caloriﬁc value (GCV) in J kg1 (ISO, 1928: 1995) usually presented as
a value free of water and ash (i.e. dry and ash free, daf), but can also

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

be referred to as combustion quality or heating value. The gross
caloriﬁc value (daf) of a fuel is directly proportional to its organic
content (Tillman et al., 1981) and since organic fuels have a fairly
narrow range of carbon contents their associated gross caloric
values (daf) also fall within a relative narrow range. According to
various databases (e.g. BIOBIB, 1996; UBET, 2004) and published
literature (e.g. Nûñez-Regueira et al., 2001) the GCV (daf) for all
three fuels investigated here is w20 MJ kg1.
As the GCV(daf) is given per mass unit (kg) the density of the
fuel becomes an important factor. For wood this means that for
a taxon with a lower density more fuel is necessary to generate the
same amount of heat relative to more dense wood. For example,
1 m3 of oak contains 750 kg of wood whereas 1 m3 of pine contains
500 kg, thus to obtain an identical amount of heat 50% more pine
volume is needed relative to oak, even though both species have an
identical GCV(daf) per kilo. This is important in view of the fact that
in the past all fuel had to be transported to the place where the ﬁre
was required and thus the required energy expenditure may have
affected the source tree(s) selected.
Water and ash content can also signiﬁcantly affect the caloriﬁc
value of fuels, as their presence reduces the organic fraction of
a fuel. The total moisture content of freshly harvested wood may be
50% or more, which reduces the GCV of wood to w8 MJ kg1. For
undried peat and cow dung a similar 35% reduction of the GCV may
occur. Air drying reduces the water content of organic fuels to
around 15%, which in turn increases the GCV to w17 MJ kg1.
Therefore simply drying in air is a very effective means to signiﬁcantly increase the heating potential of a fuel. The ash content of
wood is about 1 wt%, and for peat ranges between 3.5 and 6 wt%
(Table 1). The ash content of cow dung however varies between 12
and 40 wt% (Sweeten et al., 2003; Mluku
z, 2009). In India the ash
content of cow dung contains around 19%, probably reﬂecting the
smaller amount of grass eaten relative to cows grazing in more
temperate locations, which in turn makes it a much more efﬁcient
fuel (Kumar and Shende, 2006). The high percentage of ash in cow
dung relative to wood and peat can be accounted for by the high
amount of silica (4e20 %) present in grass and can reduce the GCV
of cow dung to as low as 11 MJ kg1. Interestingly in this study all
three fuels were found to be able to produce ﬁres that attained
maximum temperatures in the ﬁres of 800  C (Table 3) which
agrees with the ﬁndings of other work on dung ﬁres [e.g. Samuel
(1989) and Shahack-Gross et al. (2005)].
Another factor that may inﬂuence the generation of heat from
a fuel is the ease with which air (oxygen) passes through the layer
of combusting fuel, the fuel bed, and through the structure of the
fuel itself. An increased air supply will increase the rate of
combustion (and consumption) of the fuel and in turn increase the
efﬁciency of the combustion process. In practice this means that
more fuel will be combusted faster. Therefore the geometry of the
pieces of fuel in the fuel bed may exercise an inﬂuential role. Felled
wood cut into smaller pieces or coppice wood will create a high
fraction of void space in the fuel bed thus increasing the amount of
excess air and in turn increasing the rate of energy released relative
to uncut pieces of wood. The present experiments show that the
shape of peat and cow dung fuel specimens allowed for a smaller
void space in the fuel beds relative to wood. Apart from the void
space in the fuel bed the structure of each specimen of fuel is also of
importance. Relative to wood, peat and cow dung show a tightly
compacted ﬁbre structure and the access of air into these fuels is
much more restricted. Therefore it would be expected that peat and
dung have a lower rate of combustion compared with wood.
The characters of the different types of fuel and their fuel beds
studied here help to explain the results of the Water Boiling Tests. It
took 20 minutes and 740 g of wood fuel to bring 3 L of water to the
boil (Table 2) compared with 35 min for 915 g and 1100 g of peat

843

and cow dung fuel respectively. With a similar water content,
a GCVs(daf) of 20 MJ kg1 and carbon content of w50 wt%, the
15 minutes difference in bringing the water to the boil for peat and
cow dung have to be accounted for by the open structure of the
wood and high void space in the fuel bed of the wood ﬁre. This
allows for an increased amount of excess air entering the ﬁre, which
in turn releases more heat and enables the water to come to the boil
more quickly. This explains also the higher consumption of wood
compared with peat and dung during the next two phases of the
experiments.
The difference in mass of peat and dung used during the boiling
and simmering phases is also noteworthy. The increased amount of
cow dung needed to bring the water to the boil can be explained by
its higher ash content. However, this difference in mass is rather
small when the high ash content of cow dung is taken into
consideration e especially true during the simmering phase when
similar amounts of both fuels are needed. Smouldering was the
main combustion phase in cow dung as evidenced by the copious
release of dark grey smoke and it is suggested that this process may
have reduced the amount of used fuel. To keep the ﬁres going for
1 hour with an absolute minimum fuel requirement, more dung
than peat was needed (Table 2) and this may reﬂect the experimental nature of the investigation. The high amount of ash in the
fuel bed comprising cow dung tended to smother the ﬁre and
render it difﬁcult to determine whether the ﬁre was still going. As
a consequence more fuel could have been added than necessary.
Although the release of large quantities of smoke may be seen as
a disadvantage of using dung fuel Samuel (1989) found that
temperatures of over 100  C in dung-fuelled ﬁres can be maintained for nearly an hour without refuelling.
The results of these experiments show that fuels with tightly
compacted ﬁbre structures are more efﬁcient relative to fuels with
more open structures as they require less fuel for an equivalent heat
yield, which would be of beneﬁt to ancient societies. That explains
why today, tribes in Northern Pakistan still use yak dung, despite of
the volume of smoke released, as their preferred fuel-type
(Mortenson and Relin, 2006) and numerous Indian households
still use cow dung as fuel for their cooking as it burns with a slow,
long-lasting ﬂame that does not scorch the food. Cooking can
commence in the morning and the food left unattended for several
hours (Harris, 1974; Braadbaart, personal observations).
5.2. Ash
Ash is the characteristic inorganic residue when a biomass fuel
has undergone total combustion. It comprises the both essential
and non-essential mineral elements necessary for plant growth.
The essential minerals include calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg),
potassium (K), phosphorous (P) and sulphur (S), and the micronutrients iron (Fe), manganese (Mn) and chlorine (Cl). Other
commonly occurring minerals, but non-essential for growth,
include silica (Si), aluminium (Al) and sodium (Na). The presence of
minerals in plant material is relatively small but their signiﬁcance
in the ash residue increases since heating drives off all organic
material.
Signiﬁcant ash layers in an archaeological context can be identiﬁed by careful observation. When these layers are very thin, and
not readily visible to the naked eye, block sampling and micromorphological studies may prove useful. The particle size distribution can distinguish ash from other layers of sediments. Brochier
(1983) showed that the silt fraction (2e50 mm) of wood ash was
about 90% of the total ash content, but some layers of other sediments showed identical granulometric curves whilst for other
layers of sediment the shape of the curves was different. So when
used with due care and attention this particle size distribution

844

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

method may be helpful in identifying ash layers within archaeological contexts. Interestingly, the curves of the ashes resulting
from the three investigated fuels do not match exactly the wood
ash curve of Brochier (Fig. 3). Moreover in Brochier’s wood ash
sample the particle size curve from 10 to 20 mm contains w40% of
the sample, while the wood ash sample of this study contains only
about 10% in the same particle range. This part of the curve is
usually attributed to the calcium oxalates pseudomorphed after
calcium carbonates (Canti, 2003). Since different methods have
been employed to derive the particle size curves it seems reasonable to tentatively attribute this difference to the methodology and
more investigations are needed to clarify the differences (Brochier,
personal communication).
The source of the ash can be determined from its mineral
composition. Many studies have focused on the difference in
mineral content between different fuel types usually in relation to
heat and power generation (e.g. Misra et al., 1993; Etiégni and
Campbell, 1991; Liodakis et al., 2005; Steenari, 1995; Heikkinen
et al., 1998; Theis et al., 2006; Steenari et al., 1999; Frederiksson,
1996; Ryssen and Ndlovu, 2004; Sweeten et al., 2003; Miller and
Miller, 2007; Genin et al., 2007). The results indicate that wood
ash is comprised mainly of calcium, magnesium and potassium.
These minerals are also abundant in peat ash, but peat also has
aluminium and iron in relatively high quantities. This can be
explained by the presence of clay in peat. With regard to cow (and
other animal) dung ash the most common mineral is silica attributable to the high presence of silica in grasses. Calcium, magnesium
and potassium occur in much lower quantities relative to wood and
peat ash. The relatively small amounts of these minerals in cow
dung can be explained by the fact that animals do not store minerals
as plants do but rather secrete them from the body in the urine. The
results of the chemical composition of the three ash samples obtained here compare well with the ﬁndings of other workers
(Church et al., 2007; Misra et al., 1993; Etiégni and Campbell, 1991;
Liodakis et al., 2005; Steenari, 1995; Heikkinen et al., 1998; Theis
et al., 2006; Steenari et al., 1999; Frederiksson, 1996; Ryssen and
Ndlovu, 2004; Sweeten et al., 2003; Miller and Miller, 2007; Genin
et al., 2007) highlighting the great potential for this approach in
determining fuel-type from ash remains (Table 3).
Clear differences between the cow dung ash sample and the
wood and peat ash samples are also observed when ash samples
are viewed under the microscope (Fig. 2). The cow dung ash is
predominantly siliceous in composition, whilst the peat and wood
derived ashes are calcareous. Initially these results may seem
a good starting point when trying to determine the original fuel
from archaeological ash remains. However, the minerals present in
ash may occur as reactive oxides, and undergo secondary reactions,
whilst other minerals may form soluble salts. Some water soluble
elements, such as potassium, leach out with rainwater or ground
water, whilst others undergo reactions that render them unrecognizable in archaeological contexts. In other words ashes are
strongly prone to post-depositional processes. Moreover the
mineral composition of ash can be inﬂuenced by the temperature to
which the fuel was exposed during combustion (Misra et al., 1993;
Liodakis et al., 2005; Thy et al., 2006) with the greatest changes in
mineral composition occurring at temperatures above 700  C (and
therefore higher than those usually seen in open ﬁres rendering
these changes are not relevant to the discussion herein). A number
of studies have focused on these post-depositional changes in
relation to ash (e.g. Karkanas et al., 2002; Schiegl et al., 1996;
Brochier, 1999, 2002; Pierce et al., 1998; Simpson et al., 2003; Canti,
2003; Matthews, 2010) and conclude that although post-depositional processes may be site speciﬁc, ashes can be identiﬁed as
either a high silica:low calcium dung originated ash or a high
calcium:low silica plant derived ash (Canti, 2003).

The identiﬁcation of minerals in ash may be important especially with regard to some characteristic silica and calcium salts
that precipitate in plants to form silica phytoliths and calcium
oxalate crystals known to be important for archaeological research
(Canti, 2003; Albert et al., 2008). Phytoliths are amorphous silica (as
opal) deposits occurring in various plant tissues (Piperno, 2006;
Madella et al., 2005), but are in particular abundant in grasses
resulting in the phytolith concentration in grass ash being up to 20
times higher when compared with wood ash (Karkanas et al.,
2002). The results of this study show that silica phytoliths are
resistant not only to animal digestive processes but also to the
temperatures found in open ﬁres and (in general) post-depositional
processes (Fig. 2g and h).
Calcium oxalate crystals can occur in all plant tissues but
particularly in bark and leaves (Franceschi and Nakata, 2005; Canti,
2003). When temperatures reach 430e510  C these crystals are
converted into calcium carbonate (Brochier and Thinon, 2003). As
the original structure of the crystal does not change these aggregates are referred to as calcitic pseudomorphs after calcium oxalate.
However, under alkaline conditions the carbonates will dissolve
and disappear. Microscopial studies of the ash samples (Fig. 2)
conﬁrm the presence of calcium carbonate crystals in wood and
peat ash as well as silica phytoliths in peat and cow dung ash. The
chemical differences between peat ash and wood ash are relatively
small, but based on the results of the present experiments the most
obvious distinction is the abundance of phytoliths in peat ash
relative to wood ash although abundance will vary depending upon
the source vegetation for the peat (e.g. mosses and some sedge taxa
do not appear to contain phytoliths; Pearsall and Piperno, 1993;
Ollendorf, 1992). Faecal spherulites often present in ashes derived
from animal dung (Canti, 1998) were not observed in the thin
section of the investigated cow dung ash studied here, which
agrees with the conclusions of Brochier (1996) on cow dung ash.
5.3. Char
Under particular heating conditions the macro-residue of a ﬁre
is the charred or carbonised residue of the fuel, the char. Chars
resulting from plant material are composed of a range of aromatic
compounds (Braadbaart, 2004; Braadbaart and Poole, 2008). The
organic constituents of the original fuel undergo thermal degradation when exposed to temperatures >300  C. Between 300 and
400  C these resulting compounds are mainly alkylated phenols
and benzenes, which form a three-dimensional network with
predominantly randomly orientated aromatic units. As the
temperature increases still further these alkylated products are
gradually replaced by condensed aromatic compounds. Above
400  C only the benzenes remain unchanged in the molecular
composition, although the molecular structure does change with
increasing temperature. Thereby the aromatic units change into
large aromatic sheets, which with increasing temperature become
increasingly parallel. This change in structure results in an increase
in the reﬂectance of the char. When polished, the reﬂectance
measurements (%Ro) of the char samples can be compared with
calibration curves that provide reﬂectance as a function of
temperature and time. This makes it possible to determine the
maximum temperature to which the fuel and any other heated
plant material (e.g. seeds that happened to fall into the ﬁre)
(Braadbaart, 2004; Braadbaart and Wright, 2007a) was subjected
and thus provides a charring temperature. This can be, for example,
a useful tool to distinguish domestic from industrial ﬁres [see
Braadbaart and Poole (2008) and McParland et al. (2010)].
Reﬂected light can also be used to differentiate, on morphological grounds, between chars derived from different fuel types.
Wood char (charcoal) is easily distinguished from the chars of peat

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

and dung. The reﬂectance of the cell walls within the wood coupled
with its ordered arrangement makes charcoal distinctive (Fig. 4a
and b) from the irregular structure of peat char (Fig. 4c and d) and
cow dung char (Fig. 4e and f). The presence of carbonized hairy
structures in the cow dung (Fig. 4f) distinguishes it from peat char
to which it otherwise appears very similar. Hairs consist for around
80% of proteins and therefore will carbonise well (Munson and
Fetterolf, 1987; Braadbaart et al., 2007b). This observation corresponds to the large quantity of hairs found in the original cow dung
sample.
Pieces of char resulting from open ﬁres were once in contact
with ash or still associated with ash when recovered from the soil.
The pH of ash is strongly alkaline and helps in reducing the ordered
molecular structure of the char. This results in a decreased reﬂectance, which can affect the conclusions drawn with regard to the
charring temperature of the ﬁre (Braadbaart et al., 2009). Increased
fragmentation may in time also result in fragments so small
(<1 mm) that they are unsuitable for determining charring
temperature or may disappear altogether from the archaeological
record.
5.4. Archaeological signiﬁcance
Based on the above discussion it is evident that both ash and
char residues can provide important information pertaining to the
original fuel and its resource. The three studied fuels - wood, peat
and cow dung, are known to have been used as a fuel by humans
and their ancestors for centuries and have different thermal,
physical and chemical properties. The ash and char microanalyses
of the three fuels show that each of these fuels has characteristics
that allow them to be distinguished from each other even though
post-depositional processes have the potential to change the
features (of char in particular) (see also Ascough et al., 2010, 2011;
Braadbaart et al., 2009; Cohen-Ofri et al., 2006) to such an extent
that they can be rendered indistinguishable and the original fuel
types unidentiﬁable. One exception to this generalisation is the
distinction between dung from wood and peat where the presence
of silica phytoliths, which can remain preserved in ash residue,
provides stronger evidence for the use of dung than wood and peat
fuels although if a grass-vegetation fuel resource (in the form of hay
or straw) has been used the ash residue will also be high in silica
phytoliths and then other approaches (e.g. morphology of ash and
char) need to be adopted to determine the fuel resource (see for
example Delhon et al., 2008).
Wood and peat are able to release similar amounts of heat per
dry unit mass, both approximately 30% more than cow dung, due in
part to the lower ash content relative to dung. However, the tightly
packed structure of peat and in particular cow dung also plays an
important role in the type of ﬁre produced. Wood fuel would be
most suited for a fast ﬁre even though fuel consumption would be
greater. For ﬁres maintained over longer periods it would be more
advantageous to use cow dung and peat fuel. Moreover additional
advantages to using cow dung and peat would be the lower fuel
consumption relative to wood and the relatively little time and
energy required to collect dung compared with that needed to chop
and transport wood.
The selection of a fuel may not simply be a random choice but
one based on relative availability and abundance of fuel categories
and types in the vicinity of the site where the ancient society lived
and the necessary transportation requirements. Moreover taphonomic processes can also inﬂuence the presence of char and ash in
the archaeological setting (Théry-Parisot et al., 2010).
The chars and ashes are extremely vulnerable to excavation
processes including trowelling, sieving and ﬂotation (Matthews,
2010). Chars resulting from peat and cow dung are more friable

845

than those of wood and thus easily destroyed. Ash grains are rather
small (<50 mm) and easily lost during these processes. In order to
circumvent this, special care needs to be taken during sampling and
subsequent treatment of ash and char to prevent further loss of this
material. Block (undisturbed) sampling is thus recommended.
6. Conclusions
Ash and char remains provide useful indicators of anthropogenic ﬁre usage with regard to the original fuel resource and type,
and thus palaeoenvironment, as well as different functions of that
ancient society through the type of ﬁre required. From this study
we conclude that:
i. Wood, peat and cow dung ﬁres are capable of releasing
similar amounts of heat.
ii. Wood results in fast ﬁres, whilst peat and cow dung ﬁres tend
to be more efﬁcient for cooking and heating of dwellings
where a more consistent temperature over longer periods of
time is required.
iii. Char residues of the three studied fuel-types can easily be
distinguished under reﬂected light and therefore it is recommended that all char recovered from archaeological
contexts is examined in this way. Moreover the reﬂectance of
these polished char samples can be measured thus providing
a good indication of the charring temperature of the ﬁre (see
also Braadbaart and Poole, 2008).
iv. Ash from the three fuel-types can be distinguished by their
elemental composition and structure under incident light.
However, even though ash can be inﬂuenced by depositional
and post-depositional factors that affect the elemental and
structural component, which may also differ from site to site,
the chemical analysis of ash can provide indications of the
original fuel-type.
v. The presence of silica phytoliths in ash can be used to
determine fuel resource with the greater the proportion of
phytoliths indicating a greater likelihood of the fuel having
been dung as opposed to wood or peat, although high phytolith concentrations will also be found when grass (e.g. as
hay or straw) have been used.
vi. Pseudomorphs of calcium oxalate crystals occur in wood and
peat ash, but are not observed in dung ash from cows grazing
in meadows.
vii. For both friable chars and ashes special care should be taken
during sample collection as well as treatment (e.g. sieving,
ﬂotation) to reduce damage and loss of material that in turn
can result in the loss of important information pertaining to
the ancient society.
viii. Given the use of different fuel types in modern traditional
societies, it is highly likely that ancient societies also
considered more than one fuel resource depending upon
requirements especially in regions where more than one was
available.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the staff members of Schothorst Early Medieval Farm (Amersfoort, the Netherlands) and
Veenpark (Bargermond, the Netherlands) for providing us with
cow dung and peat samples, respectively. Technical assistance with
the reﬂectance and granulometry measurements by Deltares
(Utrecht, the Netherlands) is highly acknowledged. We also thank
Dr. D.M. Pearsall (University of Missouri, Columbia MO, USA) and
Mr. E. Mulder (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, the
Netherlands) for their assistance with the phylotith research.

846

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847

References
Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Meigner, L., 2000. Phytoliths in the middle
palaeolithic deposits of Kebara Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: study of the plant
materials used for fuel and other purposes. Journal of Archaeological Science 27,
931e947.
Albert, R.M., Shahack-Gross, R., Cabanes, D., Gilboa, A., Lev-Yadun, S., Portello, M.,
Sharon, I., Boaretto, E., Weiner, S., 2008. Phytolith-rich layers from the Late
Bronze and Iron Ages at Tel Dor (Israel): mode of formation and archaeological
signiﬁcance. Journal of Archaeological Science 35, 57e75.
Antal Jr., M.J., Grønli, M., 2003. The art, science, and technology of charcoal
production. Industrial Engineering Research 42, 1619e1640.
Ascough, P.L., Bird, M.I., Scott, A.C., Collinson, M.E., Cohen-Ofri, I., Snape, C.E., Le
Manquais, K., 2010. Charcoal reﬂectance measurements: implications for
structural characterization and assessment of diagenetic alteration. Journal of
Archaeological Science 37, 1590e1599.
Ascough, P.L., Bird, M.I., Francis, S.M., Lebl, T., 2011. Alkali extraction of archaeological and geological charcoal: evidence for diagenetic degradation and
formation of humic acids. Journal of Archaeological Science 38, 69e78.
BIOBIB e A Database for Biofuels, 1996. www.vt.tuwien.ac.at/biobib/biobib.html.
Boon, J.J., Dupont, L., Leeuw, de, J.W., 1986. Characterization of a Peat Bog Proﬁle by
Curie point pyrolysis-mass spectrometry combined with multivariant analysis
and by pyrolysis gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. In: Fuchsman, C.H.
(Ed.), Peat and Water, pp. 215e239.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., 2008. Morphological, chemical and physical changes during
charcoliﬁcation of wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts. Journal of
Archaeological Science 35, 2434e2445.
Braadbaart, F., Wright, P.J., 2007a. Changes in mass and dimensions of sunﬂower
(Helianthus anuus L.) achenes and seeds due to carbonization. Economic Botany
61 (2), 137e153.
Braadbaart, F., Wright, P.J., Horst, van der, J., Boon,, J.J., 2007b. A laboratory simulation of the carbonization of sunﬂower achenes and seeds. Journal of Analytical
and Applied Pyrolysis 78, 316e327.
Braadbaart, F., Poole, I., Brussel, van, A.A., 2009. Preservation potential of charcoal in
alkaline environments: an experimental approach and implications for the
archaeological record. Journal of Archaeological Science 36, 1672e1679.
Braadbaart, F., 2004. Carbonization of Peas and Wheat. A Laboratory Study. Leiden
University, Leiden.
Branigan, K., Edwards, K.J., Merrony, C., 2002. Bronze age fuel: the oldest direct
evidence for deep peat cutting and stack construction? Antiquity 76, 849e855.
Brochier, J.-E., Thinon, M., 2003. Calcite crystals, starch grains aggregates or. POCC?
Comment on ‘calcite crystals inside archaeological plant tissues’. Journal of
Archaeological Science 30, 1211e1214.
Brochier, J.-E., 1983. Bergeries et feux de bois néolithiques dans le Midi de la France.
QUARTÄR 33/34, 181e193.
Brochier, J.-E., 1996. Feuilles ou Fumiers? Observations sur le rôle des poussières
sphérolithiques dansl’interprétation des depôts archéologiques holocènes.
Anthropozoologica 24, 19e30.
Brochier, J.-E., 1999. Les Phytolaires. In: Ferdière, A. (Ed.), La Botanique, Collection
“Archéologiques”. Errance Editions, Paris, pp. 157e170.
Brochier, J.-E., 2002. Les sediments anthropiques, méthodes d’étude et perspectives.
In: Miskovsky, J.C. (Ed.), Géologie de la Prehistoire: Méthodes, Techniques,
Applications. Géopré Editions, Paris, pp. 453e477.
Canti, M.G., 1998. The micromorphological idenﬁcation of faecal spherulites from
archaeological and modern materials. Journal of Archaeological Science 25, 435e444.
Canti, M.G., 2003. Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant
ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena 54, 339e361.
Church, M.J., Peters, C., Batt, C.M., 2007. Sourcing ﬁre ash on archaeological sites in
the western and northern Isles of Scotland, using mineral magnetism. Geoarchaeology 22, 747e774.
Cohen-Ofri, I., Weiner, L., Boaretto, E., Mintz, G., Weiner, S., 2006. Modern and fossil
charcoal: aspects of structure and diagenesis. Journal of Archaeological Science
33, 428e439.
Delhon, C., Martin, L., Argant, J., Thiébault, S., 2008. Shepherds and plants in the
Alps: multi-proxy archaeobotanical analysis of neolithic dung from “La Grande
Rivoire” (Isère, France). Journal of Archaeological Science 35, 2937e2952.
Emmons, H.W., Atreya, A., 1982. The science of wood combustion. Proceedings of
Indian Academic Science (Engineering Sciences) 4, 259e268.
Etiégni, L., Campbell, A.G., 1991. Physical and chemical characteristics of wood ash.
Biosource Technology 37, 173e178.
Franceschi, V.R., Nakata, P.A., 2005. Calcium oxalate in plants: formation and
function. Annual Review of Plant Biology 56, 41e71.
Frederiksson, D., 1996. Peat resources in Sweden. In: Lapalainnen, E. (Ed.), Global
Peat Resources, pp. 137e143.
Genin, D., Khorgani, T., Hammadi, M., 2007. Improving nutritive value of a North
African range grass (Stipa tenacisssima): effect of dung ash and urea treatment
on digestion by goats. Animal Feed Science and Technology 136, 1e10.
Goudsblom, J., 1992. Fire and Civilization. Allen Lane, London.
Hage van der, E.R.E., Mulder, M.M., Boon, J.J., 1993. Structural characterization of
lignin polymers by temperature-resolved in-source pyrolysis-mass spectrometry and Curie-point pyrolysis egas chromatography/mass spectrometry.
Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 25, 149e183.
Harris, M., 1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. The Riddles of Culture. Random
House, New York.

Heikkinen, R., Laitinen, R.S., Tapio, Patrikainen, Tiaien, M., Virtanen, M., 1998.
Slagging tendency of peat ash. Fuel Processing Technology 56, 69e80.
International standard ISO 7404-2, 1985. Methods for the Petrographic Analysis of
Bituminous Coal and Anthracite e Part 2: Method of Preparing Coal Samples
ref. no. ISO 7404/2e1985(E).
International standard ISO 7404-5, 1994. Methods for the Petrographic Analysis of
Bituminous Coal and Anthracite - Part 5: Method of Determining Microscopically the Reﬂectance of Vitrinite ref. no. ISO 7404-5: 1994 (E).
International standard ISO 1928, 1995. Solid Mineral Fuels e Determination of Gross
Caloriﬁc Value by the Bomb Calorimetric Method, and Calculation of Net
Caloriﬁc value.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.-P., Simek, J.F., Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., 2002. Ash Bones and
Guano: a study of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of Grotte XVI,
Dordogne, France. Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 721e732.
Kumar, J.S., Shende, D., 2006. Combustion of cow dung in Fluidized State for
household Purposes. Advances in Energy Research, 113e116.
Liodakis, S., Katsigiannes, G., Kakali, G., 2005. Ash properties of some dominant
Greek forest species. Thermochimica Acta 437, 158e167.
Madella, M., Alexandre, A., Ball, T., 2005. International Code for phytolith Nomenclature 1.0. Annals of Botany 96, 253e260.
Matthews, W., 2010. Geoarchaeology and taphonomy of plant remains and microarchaeological residues in early urban environments in the Ancient Near East.
Quaternary International 214, 98e113.
McParland, L., Collinson, M.E., Scott, A.C., Campbell, G., Veal, R., 2010. Is vitriﬁcation
in charcoal a result of high burning of wood? Journal of Archaeological Science
37, 2679e2687.
Miller, S.F., Miller, B.G., 2007. The occurrence of inorganic elements in various
biofuels and its effect on ash chemistry and behaviour and use in combustion
products. Fuel Processing Technology 88, 1155e1164.
Miller, N.F., 1984. The use of dung as fuel: an Ethnographic example and an
archaeological application. Paléorient 10, 71e79.
Misra, M.K., Ragland, K.W., Baker, A.W., 1993. Wood ash composition as a function of
furnace temperature. Biomass and Bioenergy 4, 103e116.
Mluku
z, D., 2009. The materiality of dung: the manipulation of dung in Neolithic
Mediterranean caves. Documenta Praehistorica XXXVI, 219e225.
Mortenson, G., Relin, D.O., 2006. Three Cups of Tea. Penguin Books Ltd, London, England.
Mumford, L., 1963. Technics and Civilization. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.
Munson, T.O., Fetterolf, D.D., 1987. Evidence for the formation of 2,4imidazolinediones and pyrrolidino[1,2a]-3,6-piperazinediones in human hair
pyrolyzate by pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of
Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 11, 15e24.
NEN 5750, 1989. Netherlands Norm. Soil e Determination of pH in Soil Samples.
Núñez-Regueira, L., Rodríguez-Añon, J.A., Proupín-Castiñeras, J., Vilanova-Diz, A.,
Montero-Santoveña, N., 2001. Determination of caloric values of forest waste
biomass by static bomb calorimetry. Thermochimica Acta 371, 23e31.
Ollendorf, A.L., 1992. Towards a classiﬁcation of sedges (Cyperaceae) phytoliths. In:
Rapp Jr., G., Mulholland, S.C. (Eds.), Phytoliths Systematics. Plenum Press, New
York, USA, pp. 91e106.
Out, W.A., 2009. Firewood collection strategies at Dutch wetland sites in the process
of Neolithisation. The Holocene, 1e14.
Pearsall, D.M., Piperno, D.R., 1993. Current Research in Phytolith Analysis: Applications in Archaeology and Paleoecology. Univ. of Pennsylvania, MASCA.
Pierce, C., Adams, K.R., Stewart, J.D.,1998. Determining the fuel constituents of ancient
hearth ash via ICP-AES analysis. Journal of Archaeological Science 25, 493e503.
Piperno, D.R., 2006. Phytoliths: A Comprehensive Guide for Archaeologists and
Paleoecologists. AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD, USA.
Pouwels, A.D., Eijkel, G.B., Arisz, P.W., Boon, J.J., 1989. Evidence for oligomers in
pyrolysates of microcristalline cellulose. Journal of Analytical and Applied
Pyrolysis 15, 71e84.
Ryssen, van, J.B.J., Ndlovu,, H., 2004. Ash from ﬁreplaces at homesteads in rural
regions of South Africa as potential source of minerals to goats. South African
Journal of Animal Science 34, 111e113.
Samuel, D., 1989. Their staff of live: initial investigations on ancient Egyptian bread
baking. In: Kemp, B.J. (Ed.), Amarna Reports V. Egypt Exploration Society,
London, pp. 253e290.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in Hayonim and
Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations,
and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 23,
763e781.
Shaﬁzadeh, F., 1981. Basic Principles of direct combustion. In: Sofer, S.S., Zaborsky, C.
(Eds.), Biomass Conversion Processes for Energy and Fuels. Plenum Press,
New York, pp. 103e141.
Shahack-Gross, R., Albert, R.-M., Gilboa, A., Nagar-Hilman, O., Sharon, I., Weiner, S., 2005.
Geoarchaeology in an urban context: the uses of space in a Phoenician Monumental
building at Tel Dor (Israel). Journal of Archaeological Science 32, 1417e1431.
Shahack-Gross, R., 2011. Herbivorous livestock dung: formation, taphonomy,
methods for identiﬁcation and archaeological signiﬁcance. Journal of Archaeological Science 38, 205e218.
Simpson, I.A., Vésteinsson, O., Adderley, W.P., McGovern, T.H., 2003. Fuel resource utilisation in landscapes of settlement. Journal of Archaeological Science 30,1401e1420.
Steenari, B.-M., Schelander, S., Lindqvist, O., 1999. Chemical and leaching characteristics of ash from combustion of coal, peat and wood in a 12 MW CFB e a comparative study. Fuel 78, 249e258.
Steenari, B.-M., 1995. Characterization of ashes from wood and straw. Biomass and
Bioenergy 8, 105e115.

F. Braadbaart et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 836e847
Sweeten, J.M., Annamalai, K., Thien, B., McDonald, L.A., 2003. Co-ﬁring of coal and
cattle feedlot biomass (FB). Part I. Feedlot biomass (cattle manure) fuel quality
and characteristics. Fuel 82, 1167e1182.
Theis, M., Skrifvars, B.-J., Zevenhoven, M., Hupa, M., Tran, H., 2006. Fouling tendency
of ash resulting from burning mixtures of biofuels. Part 3. Inﬂuence of probe
surface temperature. Fuel 85, 2002e2011.
Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Chrzavzez, J., 2010. Anthracology and taphonomy, from
wood gathering to charcoal analysis. A review of the taphonomic processes
modifying charcoal assemblages, in archaeological contexts. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 291, 142e153.

847

Thy, P., Jenkins, B.M., Grunvig, S., Shiraki, R., Lesher, C.E., 2006. High temperature
elemental losses and mineralogical changes in common biomass ashes. Fuel 85,
783e795.
Tillman, D.A., Rossi, A.J., Kitto, W.D., 1981. Wood Combustion, Principles, Processes
and Economics. Academic Press Inc., USA.
Uniﬁed Bioenergy Terminology e UBET, 2004. Food and Agricultural Organisation
of the United Nations, Forestry Department. www.fao.org/DOCREP/007/j4504E/
j4504e.htm.
VITA, 1985. Testing the Efﬁciency of Wood-burning Cookstoves. International
Standards. Volunteers in Technical Assistance, Arlington, Virginia, USA.

