Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc de Marsal (France)
Vera Aldeias a, *, Paul Goldberg b, c, Dennis Sandgathe d, e, Francesco Berna b, Harold L. Dibble e, f, g,
Shannon P. McPherron f, Alain Turq h, Zeljko Rezek e
a

Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Hayden Hall 240 South 33rd Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Department of Archaeology, 675 Commonwealth Ave., Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
c
Heidelberg Acad. of Science and Humanities, ROCEEH, Rümelinstrasse 23, 72070 Tübingen, Germany
d
Department of Archaeology and Human Evolutionary Studies Program, 8888 University Drive, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A-1S6, Canada
e
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, 3260 South Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
f
Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Studies, Deutscher Platz 6, Leipzig D-04103, Germany
g
Institute of Human Origins, School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Box 874101, Tempe, AZ 85282-4101, USA
h
Museé National de Préhistoire, Les Eyzies 24200, France
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 December 2011
Received in revised form
25 January 2012
Accepted 28 January 2012

The association of Neandertal occupations with ﬁre has been reported for several European late Middle
Paleolithic sites. Renewed excavations at the French site of Roc de Marsal (Dordogne) have exposed
a series of well-preserved ﬁre features associated with artifact-rich Neandertal occupations. This paper
provides detailed descriptions of the combustion sediments and associated archaeological assemblages,
using ﬁeld observations and laboratory methods, including soil micromorphology, FTIR, and GIS techniques. From an integrity point of view, the available data demonstrate the excellent preservation of the
hearths at Roc de Marsal, which display minimal or no post-depositional movement. However, our
results suggest that it is often impossible to access the level of contemporaneity between different
combustion events, the absence of association between burned objects and the hearths, and that it is
often very difﬁcult to distinguish distinct ﬁre events based solely on macroscopic observations. These
problems have signiﬁcant implications for how such features are excavated and analyzed.
Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Roc de Marsal
Mousterian
Combustion features
Micromorphology
Spatial analyzes
Geographical information Systems
Fire

1. Introduction
The development of controlled use of ﬁre must be seen as one of
the most important developments in prehistory. Currently there is
signiﬁcant debate over what constitutes the earliest evidence for
controlled use of ﬁre, although there appears to be incontrovertible
evidence by at least 250 ka (e.g., Mercier et al., 2007; Roebroeks and
Villa, 2011). However, even after 250 ka ﬁre-use appears to have
remained intermittent, at least in Europe, until perhaps the Upper
Paleolithic (Sandgathe et al., 2011a, 2011b). And while ﬁre presents
a range of potential functions (e.g., cooking food, providing light,
providing warmth, heat treatment of lithics, etc.), it has proven
difﬁcult to determine exactly its applications during the Paleolithic
(Sandgathe et al., 2011a). It is true, however, that detailed studies of
ﬁre residues are rare, though more recently several examples
illustrate where they have been studied more closely with regard to
spatial organization (e.g., Galanidou, 2000; Henry, 2012; Henry
et al., 2004; Vallverdú et al., 2012; Vaquero and Pastó, 2001) and
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ1 215 520 0726.
E-mail addresses: valdeias@sas.upenn.edu, veraldeias@gmail.com (V. Aldeias).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2012.01.039

internal composition and structure (e.g., Baquedano et al., 2004;
Berna and Goldberg, 2008; Dibble et al., 2009; Goldberg et al.,
2012, 2009; Gómez et al., 2010; Schiegl et al., 1996, 2004; Texier
et al., 2010). The aim of this paper is to provide detailed data on
combustion features uncovered during recent excavations at the
French Neandertal site Roc de Marsal. These include (1) highresolution micromorphological data on the nature and variation in
composition of combustion features and on their internal organization and structure; (2) basic data on their vertical and spatial
distribution, and variation in size and shape. The high-resolution
micromorphological data can be evaluated in order to understand
some aspects of Neandertal pyrotechnology: types of combustibles
used, hearth integrity, or temperatures attained. In addition, data
are presented on the spatial distribution of these features and
associated artifacts in an attempt to reconstruct patterns of site use.

2. The site of Roc de Marsal
Roc de Marsal is a small cave that developed along a ﬁssure in
Cenonian limestone. The south-facing cave is situated 80 m above

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

a small tributary valley of the Vézère River, approximately 5 km
southwest of Les Eyzies (Fig. 1). Early excavations at the site were
carried out by amateur archaeologist, Jean Laﬁlle, from 1953 until
1971 (Bordes and Laﬁlle, 1962; Sandgathe et al., 2011c; Turq, 1979).
New excavations by the authors took place from 2004 through 2010
(Turq et al., 2008).
The area of occupation at Roc de Marsal is about 50 m2 and
consists of a main elongated area trending approximately N-S
(principally squares B-N, 16-19); another, more open area, still
unexcavated, is located in the front part of the cave (Fig. 2).
Brieﬂy, the principal aspects of the stratigraphic succession are
as follows. Overall, the deposits consist of sands and silts, with
abundant lithic and bone remains. In the basal layers, these
components are interbedded with intact and partly remobilized
combustion features (CF) principally comprised of charcoal and
organic matter, burned bone, and ashes. Seven geological lithostratigraphic units (GU, numbered from bottom to top) were identiﬁed based on color, composition, and texture. Within these
geological units several archaeological layers (AL) were recognized
using these and other criteria; these are numbered from top to
bottom. GU 1, is of particular focus here and include AL 10 through
6. The main features of each of the GU and AL are illustrated in Fig. 3
and summarized in Table 1.
The dating of the site is still on going. A series of preliminary TL
dates from burned sediments at the very base of the sequence have
yielded ages spanning from 72 to 91 kya (Guibert et al. in Sandgathe
et al., 2008), suggesting that the initial occupations at Roc de Marsal
began in Marine Isotopic Stage (MIS) 5a. A mean ESR date for AL2
(the ﬁnal Mousterian layer) of 43,600  2600 (Blackwell et al. in
Sandgathe et al., 2008) suggests the ﬁnal Mousterian occupations
occurred during late mid-MIS 3.
The upper part of the Roc de Marsal sequence, that is ALs 4
through 2, contains Quina Mousterian industries characterized by
high frequencies of scrapers made on thick blanks, few cores, and
almost no Levallois components. These levels also contain very high
concentrations of heavily butchered faunal remains dominated
almost entirely by reindeer (Rangifer tarandus), but with small
percentages of bos/bison and Equus sp. The combustion features,
however, are associated with ALs 10, 9, and 7, which contain
Mousterian industries characterized by lower frequencies of
retouched pieces overall, more cores and clearer evidence that core
reduction took place on the site, signiﬁcant presence of Levallois
technique, and many so-called Asinipodian elements (Bordes, 1975;

Fig. 1. Map showing the location of Roc de Marsal in relation to other Middle Paleolithic sites in the vicinity.

2415

Fig. 2. The general plan of Roc de Marsal showing shape of cave, grid, and areas left by
Laﬁlle, as well as those excavated recently by the current team.

Dibble and McPherron, 2006), including diminutive Levallois cores,
truncated-faceted pieces, and Kombewa cores and ﬂakes. ALs 9
through 5 contain lower concentrations of faunal remains
compared to the upper layers, although they are still rich in fauna
that were also heavily exploited. There is also a wider range of
species represented, including red deer (Cervus elephus), roe deer
(capreolus capreolus), wild pig (sus scrofa), horse (Equus sp.), and

Fig. 3. West Section of proﬁle at Roc de Marsal at end of 2009 season showing
stratigraphic layers described in Table 1. The blue tags represent Geological Units (GU),
whereas the white ones refer to Archaeological Layers (AL). The meter stick is lying on
bedrock, which slopes gradually to the north and south from the center of the photo.
The arrow points north and is 20 cm long. (For interpretation of the references to color
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

2416

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

Table 1
Summary of principal Geological Units (GU) and Archaeological Layers (AL) from Roc de Marsal. (Read from bottom up).
Geol. Lithostrat.
unit (GU)

Arch.
layer (AL)

Field description

7

1

6
5

2

4

3

3

4

2

5

Layer with high organic content, especially outside the cave, but is highly disturbed. This is due to both bioturbation and
later Medieval occupants who excavated into this AL to create storage pits. The archaeological material reﬂects this
disturbance, including historic materials (metal, pottery) as well as a small number of lithic items that may be Middle
and/or Upper Palaeolithic, but which are not particularly diagnostic. 10e30 cm thick.
Yellow to light brown clayey-silt, very similar in composition to AL 4; predominantly Aeolian in origin. It includes a large
number of limestone blocks (roof fall) ranging from centimeter to meter size. In fact, inside the cave, AL2 is capped
by a layer of roof collapse approximately three quarters of a meter thick. The ﬁner sediments are approximately
45e50 cm thick.
A very thin lens that is not found throughout the site. Similar in composition to AL4, but is notably darker. Thickest
(c. 1e2 cm) near the cave mouth.
Resembles AL5 in general composition except it is light yellow-brown color and is less consolidated. Rich in lithics, but
most not able for the high concentration of faunal remains. 20e30 cm thick.
Composed of light gray clayey-silts that are ﬁner in texture than the lower deposits. It includes small to medium sized
pieces of limestone roof fall and a high concentration of archaeological materials. The lithic component is assigned to the
Typical Mousterian industry with a signiﬁcant Levallois component. 10e15 cm thick.
Similar to AL8, it is discontinuous across the site and thickest (c. 3e5 cm) just inside the cave mouth. It is composed of
brown clayey-silts.
Similar in color and basic composition to AL8, although darker (due to a higher content of charcoal and burned bone);
has slightly decreased concentration of archaeological materials. As in AL9, it contains numerous intact and discrete
combustion features. 5e8 cm thick.
Occurs mainly just inside the cave mouth and is discontinuous across the site. It is composed of gray-brown clayey-silts
with abundant archaeological materials. c. 8e10 cm thick.
Clayey-silts with a very marked anthropogenic component of combustion features consisting of ash, burned bone, and
charcoal; these components occur in both localized lenses and as more massive accumulations. AL9 contains the most
abundant combustion features and very high concentrations of archaeological materials. 5e10 cm thick.
Very thin (c. 1e5 cm) orange clayey-silt, with some small fragments of roof fall. Very little archaeological material, but
lens of rubeﬁed AL10 sediments separated from AL9 by thin lens of unrubeﬁed AL10 sediments indicate that the initial
occupations were associated with uppermost AL10.
Brown to orange clayey-sand that rests directly on bedrock and ﬁlls in locally undulating karstic mini-topography.
1e2 cm to 20e30 cm thick; archaeologically sterile.

6
7

8
9

1

10

13e11

beaver (Castor sp.); reindeer, while rare in ALs 9 and 8, steadily
increase in frequency throughout the sequence.
3. Methods
3.1. Excavation methods
The methods of excavation employed at Roc de Marsal follow
the concepts used in other archaeological sites and described
elsewhere (see Dibble et al., 1997; Dibble and Lenoir, 1995;
McPherron and Dibble, 2002). The location of all artifacts (stone
tools, bones, charcoal fragments, etc) with dimensions greater than
2.5 cm was recorded using a total station and integrated into the
local coordinate system developed for the site. All non-artifact
features, including hearth-related sediments, were recorded in
the same manner, with the limits of these sediments taken as
sequential points. This method of point proveniencing all individual artifacts and features allowed the recording of spatial
information in three dimensions.
In addition, once the hearth-rich anthropogenic layers (namely
AL7 and 9) were reached during excavation, the methodology was
modiﬁed to expose “décapage” surfaces. This excavation method
has been widely used in archaeology, particularly in French
archaeological contexts (see, for example the excavation at the site
of Pincevent: Leroi-Gourhan, 1984). The basic concept of décapage is
to expose the features and archaeological materials and to associate
these objects with a speciﬁc décapage surface number. Consequently, the criteria to deﬁne each décapage surface is somewhat
ﬂexible and inherently dependent on factors such as the concentration of artifacts and/or features exposed while excavating thin
slices of sediments over a somewhat horizontal surface. The
décapage method we used, however, still involves the separation of
different natural and anthropic layers. Consequently, since the
combustion features are often composed of the superposition of

distinct types of sediments (for instance, an ash layer overlying
charcoal-rich sediments): each of these deposits was excavated
separately and associated with distinct décapage surface numbers.
The result of these procedures is the slicing of a stratigraphic
unit into several sub-surfaces (often of varying thickness, but
generally within a range of 2e4 cm) that e at least theoretically should associate artifacts and bones that are penecontemporaneous. As each décapage surface was exposed, it was then photographed, and its associated bones and artifacts were provenienced
and removed, with each object or sample linked to the décapage
surface on which it was found and also linked to particular
combustion features. It should be emphasized that there is no claim
that these décapage surfaces represent “living ﬂoors.” In fact, as the
discussion below will make clear, our own experience has led us to
be skeptical that such surfaces can be identiﬁed or followed across
a speciﬁc horizon, at least in a sedimentary environment such as
that which exists at Roc de Marsal.
The individual combustion features were studied ﬁrst in the
ﬁeld during excavation and then sampled for micromorphological
and other analyses. Field observations were made both in plan and
section view where possible, and include diameter, thickness, color,
shape of the features, and basic composition. Commonly, however,
it was not always possible to determine these parameters because
many of the features were intercalated and overlapped. Similarly,
several extended into the unexcavated section walls, and several
more had been wholly or partially removed during the previous
excavation by Laﬁlle.
In almost all cases at Roc de Marsal individual combustion
features were easily recognized when encountered during the
excavation process, both in proﬁle section and in plan (décapage)
view. In proﬁle section, combustion features generally occurred as
thin lenses of either strongly black sediments, strongly white
sediments, and/or superimposed lens of both black and white
sediments, all with clearly observable horizontal spatial limits. Only

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

one of the combustion features was associated with a depression
and this depression was completely natural. When exposed in plan
view, with few exceptions, features were easily distinguished from
surrounding sediments by the spatial limits of the black and/or
white sediments associated with each feature; very little lateral
displacement of residues appears to have occurred, which
contributed to the very good preservation of individual combustion
features. Very few of the combustion features have undergone
varying degrees of post-depositional movement or loss of residues;
CF 27, for example, is comprised solely of a spatially discrete lens of
ﬁre-reddened (rubeﬁed) sediments. As each combustion feature
was encountered and its limits deﬁned, it was assigned its own
combustion feature (‘CF’) number in a simple sequence applied to
the whole site. Although 27 combustion features were initially
recognized and thus numbered, the total eventually decreased to
22, as some were eventually rejected either as excavation proceeded or because of subsequent laboratory analyses. In some
cases, while it was clear that multiple features had been encountered because of spatial overlapping and limited vertical separation,
the individual limits of the features were unclear, and this was
reﬂected by adding letter sufﬁxes to their identiﬁcation numbers
(e.g., CF18a and CF18b).
3.2. Analytical methods
3.2.1. Micromorphology
The combustion features were studied primarily using micromorphology and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR).
Micromorphology has proven to be an effective means to evaluate
both the components of combustion features but also their
internal organization and degree of integrity (Berna and Goldberg,
2008; Cabanes et al., 2010; Goldberg and Berna, 2010; Goldberg
et al., 2012, 2009; Mallol et al., 2010; Mallol et al., 2007). Similarly, it is possible to recognize whether a particular combustion
feature is intact or whether it has been modiﬁed by certain postdepositional and syn-depositional effects such as trampling
(Miller et al., 2010).
Micromorphological samples were collected from combustion
features during the excavation as intact blocks that, in certain
places in the cave, commonly spanned more than one recognized
combustion feature. These blocks (varying in size but typically
being w20 cm long by w12e15 cm wide and deep), were oven
dried for several days at w60  C and then impregnated with
unpromoted polyester resin diluted with styrene at a ratio of 7
parts resin to 3 parts styrene. Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide (MEKP)
was added as a catalyst at about 7 ml MEKP to 1 L resin/styrene
mixture. After gelling, the blocks were heated overnight at w60  C
and then sliced with a diamond rock saw to ﬁt the 50  75 mm
dimension of the thin section. These trimmed chips were sent to
Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, Washington, USA), where
they were processed into petrographic thin sections (30 mm thick).
FTIR spectra were obtained from both micro bulk samples using
K-BR pellets and from direct measurements of bone, clay, and ashes
within the thin sections. Samples processed in thin section were
analyzed by FTIR microspectroscopy using a Thermo-Nicolet
Continuum IR microscope attached to the spectrometer. Spectra
of particles with diameter of about 100 mm were collected either
with ATR diamond objective, or with a Reﬂectocromat 15 objective in Transmission mode. The spectra were collected between
4000 and 450 cm1at 8 cm1 resolution.
3.2.2. Spatial analyses of combustion feature horizons
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are optimal tools for
both visualizing the distribution underlying the scattering of
archaeological artifacts and to analyze diachronic changes of

2417

the assemblages. It is often the case that such studies are done
using a stratigraphic layer as the primary unit of analysis (e.g.,
Alperson-Aﬁl et al., 2009; Anderson and Burke, 2008). However,
geological units potentially incorporate numerous occupations
during hundreds or even several thousands of years. One of the
major analytical problems we face is, therefore, how to achieve
meaningful units of analyses with greater control on the temporal
relationship between distinct occupations (e.g., Vaquero, 2008;
Vaquero and Pastó, 2001).
Since there are several combustion features recognized in both
AL7 and 9 of Roc de Marsal, our goal was to examine the distribution of artifacts and other materials associated with each of these
ﬁre events. Although AL7 and 9 were excavated using the décapage
approach, several problems were encountered when individual
décapage layers were used as units of analysis. These problems
include:(1) some combustion features were sufﬁciently thick that
they spanned more than one décapage surface, and therefore their
association with the surrounding artifacts was difﬁcult to establish
with certainty; (2) the thickness of each décapage surface can be
deﬁned only loosely (excavation proceeds until artifacts are
exposed across a surface), and therefore any particular décapage
surface varies in part due to individual excavators as well as the
abundance of artifacts encountered; (3) the excavation of each
décapage was done over approximately horizontal surfaces, but
these somewhat ﬂat surfaces might not have been the original
occupational ﬂoor at each time of occupation since circumstances
such as an inclination of the bedrock might dictate non-horizontal
tilt of the cave sediments. Overall, and to be honest, we just did not
know which artifacts were associated with each combustion
feature while excavating. In order to try to establish the degree of
patterning of burned lithics and association of archaeological artifacts within and around each combustion feature (but still within
the same stratigraphic layer) a methodology was developed for
reaching thin meaningful slices of strata associated with each
feature/ﬁre event. Our approach was designed to deﬁne unbiased
units based on paleosurface markers present within the stratigraphic layers. One of these markers is obviously the presence of
a combustion feature itself, since its construction and use was done
at a time when this was the level of the cave’s ﬂoor. These features
thus offer the potential to serve as indicators of “paleosurfaces” that
can be used in deﬁning horizons of analyses.
Distinct combustion feature horizons were obtained by plotting
the limits of each combustion feature in ArcMap. The center for
each combustion event was then computed using the Mean Center
tool available in Arctoolbox. In order to assign the surface level,
a shape ﬁle was created outlining the bottom of the stratigraphic
layer, taken as our base line. The bottom of the stratigraphic layer
constitutes a surface into which sediments are added, and, consequently, a more accurate assumption of a paleosurface’s altimetric
mean throughout the thickness of the stratigraphic layer rather
than its top limit. This line was then copied and manually juxtaposed to the elevation of each mean center of combustion features.
In order to assign the artifacts to their horizons, all burned artifacts
larger than 2.5 cm in maximum dimension were joined spatially
with the nearest combustion feature horizon. ArcMap software was
used to examine the manner burned artifacts are spatially distributed within each of the produced combustion horizons, their
association with one another and with the location of identiﬁed
combustion features. Due to inherent ﬁnite nature of the type of
data we have, Kernel density estimations were chosen as an
analytical technique to identify overall patterns, following similar
approaches done in other archaeological contexts (Alperson-Aﬁl
et al., 2009). The search radius was maintained constant (with
a value of 0.3) whenever the produced maps were analyzing the
same type of artifacts over distinct horizons. The density values

2418

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

from the different horizons were then standardized to values
ranging from 0 to 100.
For AL7, where the seven individual combustion events were at
clearly distinct elevations, the produced horizons are associated with
only one combustion feature. In AL9, however, several of the
combustion features identiﬁed were at the same elevations in
different areas of the cave. Whenever this was the case it became
impossible to separate one event and/or feature from another based
on elevation, and thus some of the horizons deﬁned in this way reﬂect
the presence of one or more combustion features (e.g., ‘CF Horizon 14
and 21’ includes both CF 14 and CF 21 in the same horizon).

 CF12 (AL 9), where the higher percentage of burned lithics is
not associated with this feature but located, instead, toward the
inside of the cave.
There are also several features that are neither intact nor in their
original position, and thus cannot readily be placed in either of
these categories:
 CF2 is a small concentration of loose charcoal in a shallow
depression. Its size and composition may represent either the
remnants of an in-place hearth or, more likely, redeposited
eroded hearth residues. Its small size could indicate that partial
erosion of the material took place in the past or that a speciﬁc
activity might have been associated with it.
 CF16, with its mixture of materials, is clearly composed of
reworked ﬁre residues (mainly burned bone, burned lithics,
and charcoal e Figure S1).
 CF27 is a zone of rubeﬁed sediments that clearly marks the
original location of a combustion feature. However, as none of
the actual ﬁre residues remain, nothing can be said of the
nature of the original feature (size, components, or internal
organization) e see Figure S3.

4. Results
Below we present the results of ﬁeld and laboratory analyses of
the combustion features at Roc de Marsal. Some results are based
on the combined data of all 22 features recognized in the ﬁeld, but
limitations of space preclude a detailed treatment of all 22
combustion features. Consequently, some results are based
primarily on the analysis of a selected sample of features, namely
CFs 10, 15, 16, 18a, 20, 23, 24, and 27 (see Figures S1, S2 and S3). This
sample includes features that represent the range of variation
recognized among the total. (A summary of ﬁeld observations and
soil micromorphology analysis results for all identiﬁed features is
presented in the supplementary material Table S1).
When viewed in terms of the basic overall structure and internal
organization of the components, basically two ‘types’ of combustion
features were noted: those composed of a lower, dark (mainly
charcoal) unit coupled with an upper ash unit, and those that include
only an ash-rich-component with jumbled orientations of all
materials (bone, éboulis, charcoal, lithics). We interpret the former as
typical (and, in most cases, intact) hearths in which, after being
extinguished, the associated materials were not e or were minimally
e displaced from their original positions. The second type, with
internally mixed components and no evident structure, appear to
represent secondarily reworked combustion features, such as those
found in ash ‘dumps’ that may reﬂect hearth cleaning activity events.
Examples of intact and in-place combustion features (hearths)
include:
 CF3 and 7 (in AL 7).
 CF1, 4, 5, 10, 11, 13, 14, 18a, 18b, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26 (in AL 9).
Features interpreted as ash dumps with no internal organization
include:
 CF15 (AL 7), where it is clear from the density maps that
a considerable percentage of burned lithics were dumped
alongside with ashes (Figure S1).

4.1. Combustion feature morphology
Few complete combustion features were uncovered during the
recent excavations (due to previous excavations and our own limits
of excavation) and so spatial limits are not known for all of the
hearths. For some of the combustion features that might have been
complete, the limits were not distinct enough to be conﬁdent of the
feature’s actual extent. Several other combustion features, however,
are either complete or complete enough so that an idea of their
original dimensions can be determined with some degree of
conﬁdence (see Table 2). It is most likely that the range in sizes
reﬂects a continuum of variability, and there is no evidence at this
point that the different sizes reﬂect either duration of use and/or
group size.
The majority of in-place and intact hearths (complete and
incomplete) are 1e2 cm thick (see Table 2), although typically the
ash component is slightly thicker than the dark component. There
are some exceptions: CF20 has an ash layer that is 3 cm thick. As
revealed in thin section, CF20 is actually associated with a second,
smaller combustion feature (left unnumbered since it was only
visible in thin section). Micromorphological observations (see
supplementary material and Figure S7) show that both features
represent intact combustion deposits. The uppermost feature is
composed of a thick ash layer with common calcined bones overlying a charred plant-rich layer and rubeﬁed soil material. The

Table 2
Descriptive parameters of combustion features and artifact contents - values are not included if the feature was not complete in that dimension. CF ¼ Combustion Feature;
AL ¼ Archaeological Layer.
CF

3
7
1
4
5
18a
10
20
22
24
26

AL

7
7
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

Dimensions (cm)

Thickness (cm)

Length

Width

Dark layer

Ash layer

Total

120
45
100
100
130
125
55
50
30
115
30

e
40
90
e
e
e
e
50
e
75
20

0.5
1
12
1
0.5
0.5
1
0.5
0.5
0.5
1

1
1
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1.5
2
12
2
1.5
1.5
2
1.5
1.5
1.5
2

Fauna
(counts)

Lithics
(counts)

% Burned
lithics

145
41
135
20
e
71
20
87
24
9
38

193
44
511
208
e
162
37
136
39
93
29

33.7
9.1
17.6
71.2
e
54.9
73.0
12.5
15.4
16.1
3.4

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

second feature identiﬁed microscopically presents a thinner ash
component and is overall less well-preserved.
CF1 stands out in that at its center the lower dark component is
12 cm thick and pinches out at its limits. However, CF1 is also the
only combustion feature associated with a signiﬁcant depression,
which may have acted as a sediment trap that tended to concentrate ﬁre residues, especially burned bone and burned lithics. It
should be noted that the depression containing CF1 is entirely
natural and reﬂects the rough, karstic nature of the cave ﬂoor. In no
case are there indications (from either ﬁeld observation or thin
section analyses) that any intentional modiﬁcation of the ground
surface (for example the creation of depressions) was carried out in
order to accommodate combustion features. Of the two features
identiﬁed as ash dumps, CF12 has a thickness similar to that of the
majority of the combustion features, but CF15 is signiﬁcantly
thicker: in proﬁle section it is 7e8 cm thick at the center and looks
very much like ash that has been piled there. This interpretation is
further conﬁrmed by micromorphological observations, where the
deposits associated with CF15 are expressed by a scattered mixture
of bones (some burned), charcoal, coprolites, chert, and limestone
fragments, including reworked clumps of ash. The sediments lack
any structured sequence (see Supplementary material). All the
combustion features that are complete enough to provide some
idea of their shape can generally be described as sub-circular. Some
(for example CF18a) are more irregular, but there is no apparent
patterning. There are also no indications of any intentional
arrangements of stones or other materials associated with any
combustion features.
4.2. Contents of the combustion features
The artifactual content (materials  2.5 cm in maximum
dimension) directly associated with combustion sediments tends
to mimic the overall types of archaeological materials found

2419

elsewhere in the stratigraphic layers. Lithic artifacts characterize
the majority of the assemblages in both AL7 and 9, with a total of
4024 lithics versus 3599 bone fragments in AL7, and 8101 lithics
versus 3632 bones in AL9. Similarly, there is a higher proportion of
lithics relative to faunal remains in the sediments associated with
CFs 1, 10, 16, 18a, 20, 23, and 24. An exception is combustion feature
15, in which bone fragments make up 58% of the artifactual content.
In the majority of the combustion features, there is actually a higher
percentage of unburned lithics directly associated with the
combustion sediments; exceptions to this are CF10 and 18a, where
the percentage of burned lithics is higher than 50% (see Table 2).
There is also no distinction in terms of the altimetric distribution
(i.e., in term of depth, Z) between unburned versus burned lithics
inside the features. The presence of unburned lithics within the
inﬁlling of hearths most probably indicates that some of the artifacts were deposited after the ﬁre was extinguished. Micromorphological observations, expressed by the presence of in situ
crushed and broken bones (Fig. S7g), for instance, suggest that
trampling may have played a role in mixing these unburned lithics
with other artifacts that were directly associated with the
combustion event (Miller et al., 2010).
4.3. Spatial distribution of the combustion features and associated
objects
A number of general observations can be made regarding the
spatial distribution of individual combustion features at various
levels of resolution, from intra-layer observations, to inter-layer
observations, and ﬁnally to inter-feature observations.
In terms of the distribution of combustion features within AL7
and AL9, there is no apparent patterning either horizontally or
vertically, other than some localized concentrations of combustion
features (discussed in further detail below). The lack of any
apparent horizontal patterning could potentially be due to a lack of

Fig. 4. Spatial distribution of burned lithics (2.5 cm) in AL7. (a) Plan view plot of all burned lithics and their location on the site’s grid system; (b) Plan view of Kernel density map
of burning if all lithics of AL7 are taken into account; (c) density maps showing the main subdivisions into combustion feature horizons throughout AL7, where elevated topographies corresponds to the location of higher densities of burned lithics and the circles (depicted in black) correspond to the limits of each combustion feature. CF ¼ combustion
feature; AL ¼ Archaeological Layer.

2420

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

Fig. 5. Spatial distribution of burned lithics (2.5 cm) in AL 9. (a) Plan view plot of all burned lithics and their location on the site’s grid system; (b) Plan view of Kernel density map
of burning if all lithics of AL9 are taken into account; (c) Density maps showing the main subdivisions into combustion feature horizons throughout AL9, where elevated
topographies corresponds to the location of higher densities of burned lithics and the circles (depicted in black) correspond to the limits of each combustion feature.
CF ¼ Combustion Feature; AL ¼ Archaeological Layer.

complete site data. Many of the deposits immediately adjacent to
our own excavations were removed during the original excavations
and a signiﬁcant portion of the basal layer deposits still remains on
the terrace of the cave (units F to H, 20 to 24; Fig. 2). Perhaps with
a more complete sample across the entire site some patterning in
the horizontal distribution of combustion features would be
detectable.
4.3.1. Kernel density estimations
If we take into account the overall concentration of burned
lithics (Figs. 4b and 5b), the Kernel density maps show higher
concentrations of burned lithics located inside the cave during the
occupations associated with AL9, whereas in AL7 higher density
percentages tend to be present toward the cave’s entrance in
squares H-F 17-18. This patterning, however, seems to be related
more to the bedrock topography at Roc de Marsal than to a deliberate placement of hearths by the Neandertals. In the area of

squares J-L 16-18, the bedrock dips into the interior of the cave in
a basin shaped morphology, a topographic feature that would have
been prominent at the time of the ﬁrst occupations of the base of
layer 9. Subsequent sedimentation of the remaining deposits of AL9
and ultimately AL8 eventually ﬁlled in the micro-relief and essentially ﬂattened this area; by the time of the AL7 occupations, the
topography of the occupied surface was roughly level.
The Kernel Density Estimations for individual combustion
feature horizons on both AL7 and AL9 indicate very limited
patterning in the horizontal spatial relationship between hearths
and the distribution of burned lithics (Figs. 4 and 5). Within each AL
there are concentrations of burned lithics that seem to be associated with individual combustion features (e.g., CF horizon 4 in AL9).
There are others, however, that have no association with any
preserved, observable combustion features.
Both AL7 and AL9 have localized concentrations of combustion
features. In both layers these concentrations are the result of

Fig. 6. Location of the stacked combustion features in AL7 on the site grid (left) and proﬁle photograph of these features in the ﬁeld (right).

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

2421

Fig. 7. Location of the stacked combustion features in AL9 on the site grid (left) and proﬁle photograph of these features in the ﬁeld (right).

subsequent occupants of the site constructing their ﬁres directly (or
almost directly) on top of previously abandoned combustion
features. That these stacked sequences of features represent
multiple occupations and/or signiﬁcant temporal hiatuses between
events is indicated by several facts. The ﬁrst is that in both AL7 and
AL9 such sequences span the whole thickness of the archaeological
layer; even if rates of deposition were relatively high, the deposition of either of these layers must represent many years. Second, in
most cases very thin layers (<1 cm) of non-anthropogenic sediments cover the previous combustion feature. Micromorphological
evidence also indicates mm-thick phosphatic weathering crusts
that commonly occur on top of combustion features, again indicating some passage of time between the stacked combustion
events. In some cases, however, the individual combustion features
within the stacked sequence were not separated by intervening
sediments.
The stacking of some of the hearths, especially when the
previous one was already covered with sediment and therefore not
visible, implies some degree of consistent placement of these
features. The location of such stacked features differs between AL7
and AL9.
In AL7, a stacked series of combustion features (which, based on
ﬁeld observations, included at least CFs 3, 5 and 11) was located
beyond the dripline of the cave mouth, even if we estimate that the
roof may have extended out another meter at the time of occupation (Fig. 6). The stacked combustion features in AL9 (CFs 24, 23, 21,
and 18a/18b) was situated midway between the cave walls and
spans the current dripline of the cave mouth; most likely these
hearths would have been inside of the dripline when they were
active (Fig. 7).
5. Discussion and conclusions
Both ﬁeld and microstratigraphic observations attest to the
well-preserved nature of ﬁre residues in AL7 and AL9 at Roc de
Marsal. From a ﬁeld macrostratigraphic perspective, the combustion features are, for the most part, easily distinguishable and
horizontally delimited from the surrounding deposits. This occurrence contrasts with what the authors encountered during excavations at Pech de l’Azé IV, another cave site in the region, which
also contains signiﬁcant concentrations of slightly older ﬁre residues. At Pech de l’Azé IV, individual combustion features were
apparent in section, and in plan view their horizontal limits were
blurred due to lateral ‘bleeding’ of combustion residues, the result
of natural and/or anthropogenic processes (Goldberg et al., 2012;
Dibble et al., 2009). At Roc de Marsal, on the other hand, the
majority of the ﬁre features seem to have been constructed, used,
and abandoned without major reworking or displacement of the

residues by subsequent occupations of the site and/or by natural
processes.
The high-resolution microstratigraphic analyses have proven to
be extremely useful. For example, views of the ﬁre-associated
sediments in thin section allowed for the identiﬁcation of several
independent, mm-thick, superimposed combustion events that are
virtually undistinguishable during excavation (e.g., CF10, CF18a and
CF20 e see Supplementary Materials, and Goldberg et al., 2012).
These analyses also allowed for the high-resolution characterization of the nature and the degree of integrity of individual ﬁre
events. Overall, the evidence shows that the majority of the identiﬁed combustion features in AL7 and 9 represent intact, in-place
features, that is, with minimum or no displacement from their
original position. There are a couple of exceptions. CFs 12 and 15
were interpreted as ash dumps and, therefore, do not represent inplace burning. CF 27, located in AL10 and one of the ﬁrst identiﬁable
ﬁre events at the site, is the only example of a feature without an
ash component and is characterized instead by the presence of
a ﬁre-reddened substrate. This rubeﬁcation indicates erosion of
part of the original deposits (namely ashes and charcoal components). Other visible post-depositional alterations are related to
trampling, diagenetic alteration of the ashes (namely in the areas of
squares K16-18) and phosphate accumulation on an exposed
surface, indicating a periodic abandonment of the site.
The results of our spatial analyses show that there is no striking
patterning of the Roc de Marsal combustion features, with the
exception of minor differences in the location of stacked hearths
and a difference in the concentration of combustion features
primordially inside the cave during AL9 times and more toward the
cave mouth during AL7. The data from the intra-layer analyses
demonstrate that, for the majority of the features, there is no
association between the distribution of burned lithics and the
location of the combustion features. In fact, concentrations of
burned lithics are dispersed throughout a surface, even though
combustion features are often well-preserved and in-place.
It is too early to say that the lack of evidence for any structured
spatial organization reﬂects the lack of such behaviors of the
hominins who occupied the site, since this could be due to several
factors. There is no question, for example, that the area exposed
during our own excavations was quite limited, and for the most part
was only 1 m wide. Furthermore, trampling and other kinds of
bioturbation may have resulted in some lateral movement, but
evidence for such effects on any kind of signiﬁcant scale is lacking.
Examples of concentrations of burned artifacts not in association
with an identiﬁable combustion feature may reﬂect a natural loss of
preservation of the features, though this is difﬁcult to prove if no
evidence remains. Finally, actions taken by the hominins themselves e such as the purposeful raking out of hearth deposits and

2422

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423

subsequent dumping of the contents elsewhere (as in CF15; see
Supplementary Material) and/or the recycling of previously
deposited lithic artifacts, can signiﬁcantly alter original distributional patterns.
It was originally hoped that particular excavation and analytical
techniques, such as those developed for other sites (e.g., Abric
Romaní, Spain (Vaquero and Pastó, 2001; Vallverdú et al., 2012;
Courty et al., 2012)], El Mirón, Spain (Marín Arroyo, 2009), Mandrin, France (Yvorra, 2003), Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel (AlpersonAﬁl et al., 2009), or at Tor Faraj, Jordan (Henry et al., 2004; Henry,
2012)) would help to expose any spatial patterning on the assemblages. Unfortunately, such techniques were not successful,
perhaps due to several reasons. For example, one of the main
methodological constraints on looking for spatial patterning is
deﬁning the scales of analyses to use (see for e.g., Vaquero, 2008).
Quite simply, if the goal is to investigate how Neandertals were
using the space available to them, including where they decided to
put their combustion features, then the ﬁrst step is to decide how
best to deﬁne an ‘occupational surface’. In the case of Roc de Marsal,
as at most sites of this age, there are archaeological layers that are
obviously deposited over a geological time scale (i.e., over hundreds
and probably even thousands of years), and therefore these layers
clearly incorporate many distinct occupations with potentially
different occupational strategies. At the other end of our resolution
are the thin sections taken for micromorphological analysis, where
it is possible to recognize micro-strata of much more limited
duration, including superimposed combustion features that are not
recognizable in the ﬁeld (see Goldberg et al., 2009). Although these
micro-strata may be clearly visible under a microscope, it is
impossible to trace them out beyond the sample itself and thereby
deﬁne penecontemporaneous occupation surfaces. This, then,
makes it impossible to extrapolate the original occupation surface
at the time that a combustion feature is being used.
Unfortunately, this was the case even though every attempt was
made to expose surfaces using a décapage excavation technique. In
fact, our experience at both Roc de Marsal and Pech de l’Azé IV has
shown that such an excavation technique is too dependent on the
abundance of artifacts and decisions made by individual excavators.
Furthermore, the use of this technique will result in “surfaces” even
if artifacts are both horizontally and vertically randomly distributed, and there is no way to conﬁrm or deny that such surfaces
represent true occupational surfaces. Even from a theoretical
perspective, any surface occupied in the past undoubtedly included
a relatively thick “active zone” of several centimeters into which
artifacts were pushed and from which artifacts were incidentally
dislodged or actively selected for further use. In sum, it is our
conclusion that these approaches are not particularly useful, and
that the surfaces thus exposed are essentially an artifact of the
method itself.
In conclusion, it is clear that the basal AL7 and AL9 of Roc de
Marsal contain several combustion features e hearths e that are
exceptionally well-preserved. This observation alone is ample
evidence that European Neandertals of MIS 5-4 were able to control
ﬁres e if not able to start them e and that at certain times they used
it to a considerable degree (Sandgathe et al., 2011a). What we have
shown here is that considerable information can be gleaned from
these features through the application of high-resolution techniques such as micromorphology and FTIR analysis (see
Supplementary Material for details). However, in spite of their
almost “pristine” state of preservation, the difﬁculty of using such
features as anchors for understanding Neandertal behavioral
activities has shown to be challenging, both because of the intrinsic
nature of archaeological sediments and the inherent difﬁculty to
assess the degree of contemporaneity of archaeological features
and associated assemblages.

It is clear that by the time of the Middle Paleolithic, evidence for
controlled ﬁre occurs more frequently than before (Roebroeks and
Villa, 2011), though there is still much more to be learned about
Neandertal use of ﬁre, especially concerning its functions and the
role it may have played in Mousterian adaptations to particular
conditions. Simply documenting the presence of burning does little
to inform us on these questions. Thus, there is still a clear need for
more systematic publication of detailed analyses and descriptions
of such features from a variety of sites.
Acknowledgments
The research at Roc de Marsal had the ﬁnancial support of the US
National Science Foundation (Grants #0917739 and #0551927), the
Leakey Foundation, and the University of Pennsylvania Research
Foundation, the Service Régional de l’Archéologie, and the Conseil
Général de la Dordogne. We would like to thank Steve Schwortz for
ﬁeld observation of combustion features.
Appendix. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2012.01.039.
References
Alperson-Aﬁl, N., Sharon, G., Kislev, M., Melamed, Y., Zohar, I., Ashkenazi, S.,
Rabinovich, R., Biton, R., Werker, E., Hartman, G., Feibel, C., Goren-Inbar, N.,
2009. Spatial organization of hominin activities at Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel.
Science 326, 1677e1680.
Anderson, K.L., Burke, A., 2008. Reﬁning the deﬁnition of cultural levels at Karabi
Tamchin: a quantitative approach to vertical intra-site spatial analysis. Journal
of Archaeological Science 35, 2274e2285.
Baquedano, E., Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Pérez-González, A., Marquez, B., 2004.
Excavaciones arqueológicas en Pinilla del Valle (Madrid). IV Congresso de
Arqueologia Peninsular. Faro (Portugal) 2004.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2008. Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and associated
hominin behavior in Israel. Israel Journal of Earth Sciences 56, 107e121.
Bordes, F., 1975. Le gisement de Pech de l’Azé IV: Note préliminaire. Bulletin de la
Société Préhistorique Française 72, 293e308.
Bordes, F., Laﬁlle, J., 1962. Paléontologie humains: découverte d’un squelette d’enfant moustérien dans le gisement du Roc de Marsal, commune de Campagne du
Bugue (Dordogne). Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences 254, 714e715.
Cabanes, D., Mallol, C., Exposito, I., Baena, J., 2010. Phytolith evidence for hearths
and beds in the late Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu cave (Cantabria,
Spain). Journal of Archaeological Science 37, 2947e2957.
Courty, M.-A., Carbonell, E., Poch, J.V., Banerjee, R., 2012. Microstratigraphic and
multi-analytical evidence for advanced Neanderthal pyrotechnology at Abric
Romani (Capellades, Spain). Quaternary International 247, 294e312.
Dibble, H.L., Chase, P.G., McPherron, S.P., Tuffreau, A., 1997. Testing the reality of
a "living ﬂoor" with archaeological data. American Antiquity 62, 629e651.
Dibble, H.L., Berna, Francesco, Goldberg, Paul, McPherron, Shannon P.,
Mentzer, Susan, Niven, Laura, Richter, Daniel, Sandgathe, Dennis, ThéryParisot, Isabelle, Turq, A., 2009. A Preliminary Report on Pech de l’Azé IV, Layer
8 (Middle Paleolithic, France). PaleoAnthropology, 182e219.
Dibble, H.L., Lenoir, M., 1995. The Middle Paleolithic Site of Combe-Capelle Bas
(France). University Museum Monograph, Philadelphia.
Dibble, H.L., McPherron, S.P., 2006. The missing mousterian. Current Anthropology
47, 777e803.
Galanidou, N., 2000. Patterns in caves: foragers, horticulturists and the use of space.
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 19, 243e275.
Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Micromorphology and context. Quaternary International 214, 56e62.
Goldberg, P., Dibble, H., Berna, F., Sandgathe, D., McPherron, S.J.P., Turq, A., 2012.
New evidence on Neandertal use of ﬁre: examples from Roc de Marsal and Pech
de l’Azé IV. Quaternary International 247, 325e340.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L.,
2009. Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance in the middle stone age of Sibudu
cave, KwaZulu-Natal, south Africa. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences
1 (2), 95e122.
Gómez, D.d.l.R., Mallol, C., Galván, B.S., Hernández, C.M.G., 2010. Una visión geoarqueológica general del yacimiento musteriense de El Salt (Alcoy, Alicante)
a partir de la micromorfología de suelos. Recerques del Museu d’Alcoi 19,
19e32.
Henry, D.O., Hietala, H.J., Rosen, A.M., Demidenko, Y.E., Usik, V.I., Armagan, T.L.,
2004. Human behavioral organization in the Middle Paleolithic: were Neanderthals different? American Anthropologist 106, 17e31.

V. Aldeias et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 39 (2012) 2414e2423
Henry, D.O., 2012. The palimpsest problem, hearth pattern analysis, and Middle
Paleolithic site structure. Quaternary International 247, 246e266.
Leroi-Gourhan, A., 1984. Pincevent: campement magdalenien de chasseurs de
rennes, Guides archaeologiques de la France. Ministere de la culture Direction
du Patrimoine Sous-directon de l’archeologie, Paris.
Mallol, C., Cabanes, D., Baena, J., 2010. Microstratigraphy and diagenesis at the
upper Pleistocene site of Esquilleu cave (Cantabria, Spain). Quaternary International 214, 70e81.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F.W., Wood, B.M., Porter, C.C., 2007. Earth, wind, and ﬁre:
ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. Journal of Archaeological Science 34,
2035e2052.
Marín Arroyo, A.B., 2009. Assessing what lies beneath the spatial distribution of
a zooarchaeological record: the use of GIS and spatial correlations at El Mirón
Cave (Spain). Archaeometry 51, 506e524.
McPherron, S.P., Dibble, H., 2002. Using Computers in Archaeology: a Practical
Guide. McGraw Hill, New York.
Mercier, N., Valladas, H., Froget, L., Joron, J.L., Reyss, J.L., Weiner, S., Goldberg, P.,
Meignen, L., Bar-Yosef, O., Belfer-Cohen, A., Chech, M., Kuhn, S.L., Stiner, M.C.,
Tillier, A.M., Arensburg, B., Vandermeersch, B., 2007. Hayonim Cave: a TL-based
chronology for this Levantine Mousterian sequence. Journal of Archaeological
Science 34, 1064e1077.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
modiﬁes combustion features. In: Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Costamagno, S.
(Eds.), The Raphonomy of Burned Organix Residues and Combustion Features in
Archaeological Contexts, Palethnologie, Proceedings od the round table, Valbonne, May 27e29, pp. 25e37.
Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of ﬁre in
Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 108, 5209e5214.
Sandgathe, D., Goldberg, P., Dibble, H., McPherron, S.P., Turq, A., Schwortz, S., 2008.
Roc de Marsal (Campagne-de-Bugue, Dordogne). Rapport d’Operation pour
l’Annee 2008. Report on ﬁle with the Service Regional de l’Archaeologie,
Bordeaux.
Sandgathe, D.M., Dibble, H.L., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.P., Turq, A., Niven, L.,
Hodgkins, J., 2011a. On the Role of Fire in Neandertal Adaptations in Western
Europe: Evidence from Pech de l’Azé and Roc de Marsal, France. PaleoAnthropology, 216e242.

2423

Sandgathe, D.M., Dibble, H.L., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.P., Turq, A., Niven, L.,
Hodgkins, J., 2011b. Timing of the appearance of habitual ﬁre use. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108.
Sandgathe, D.M., Dibble, H.L., Goldberg, P., McPherron, S.P., 2011c. The Roc de
Marsal Neandertal child: a reassessment of its status as a deliberate burial.
Journal of Human Evolution 61, 243e253.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in Hayonim and
Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations,
and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 23,
763e781.
Schiegl, S., Stockhammer, P., Scott, C., Wadley, L., 2004. A mineralogical and phytolith study of the middle stone age hearths in Sibudu cave, KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100, 185e194.
Texier, P.-J., Porraz, G., Parkington, J., Rigaud, J.P., Popggenpoel, C., Miller, C.E.,
Tribolo, C., Cartwright, C., Coudenneau, A., Klein, R.G., Steele, T., Verna, C., 2010.
A Howiesons Poort tradition of engraving ostrich eggshell containers dated to
60,000 years ago at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, South Africa. PNAS 107, 6180e6185.
Turq, A., 1979. L’Evolution du Moustérian de Type Quina au Roc de Marsal et en
Périgord. Modiﬁcations de l’équilibre téchnique et typologique. Mémoire,
L’Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales.
Turq, A., Dibble, Harold, Faivre, Jean Philippe, Goldberg, Paul, McPherron, Shannon
J.P., Sandgathe, D., 2008. Le moustérien Récent du Périgord Noir: Quoi de Neuf ?
In: Jaubert, J., Bordes, J.-G., Ortega, I. (Eds.), Les Sociétés du Paléolithique dans
un Grand Sud-ouest de la France: nouveaux gisements, nouveaux résultats,
nouvelles méthodes. Mémoire de la Société Préhistorique Française, pp. 83e94.
Vallverdú, J., Alonso, S., Bargalló, A., Bartrolí, R., Campeny, G., Carrancho, Á,
Expósito, I., Fontanals, M., Gabucio, J., Gómez, B., Prats, J.M., Sañudo, P., Solé, À,
Vilalta, J., Carbonell, E., 2012. Combustion structures of archaeological level O
and mousterian activity areas with use of ﬁre at the Abric Romaní rockshelter
(NE Iberian Peninsula). Quaternary International 247, 313e324.
Vaquero, M., 2008. The history of stones: behavioural inferences and temporal
resolution of an archaeological assemblage from the Middle Palaeolithic. Journal of Archaeological Science 35, 3178e3185.
Vaquero, M., Pastó, I., 2001. The deﬁnition of spatial units in Middle Palaeolithic
sites: the hearth-related assemblages. Journal of Archaeological Science 28,
1209e1220.
Yvorra, P., 2003. The management of space in a Palaeolithic rock shelter: deﬁning
activity areas by spatial analysis. Antiquity 77, 336e344.

