Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

The black layer of Middle Palaeolithic combustion structures. Interpretation and
archaeostratigraphic implications
Carolina Mallol a, *, Cristo M. Hernández a, Dan Cabanes b, Ainara Sistiaga a, Jorge Machado a,
Ágata Rodríguez b, Leopoldo Pérez a, Bertila Galván a
a

Palaeolithic Hunter-Gatherer Societies Research Group, Universidad de La Laguna, Departamento de Prehistoria, Antropología e Historia Antigua, Campus de Guajara,
La Laguna 38071, Tenerife, Spain
GEPEG e Research Group for Palaecological and Geoarchaeological Studies, Department of Prehistory, Ancient History and Archaeology, University of Barcelona,
Montalegre, 6-8, 08001 Barcelona, Spain

b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 August 2012
Received in revised form
16 September 2012
Accepted 18 September 2012

Certain aspects of the formation processes of simple, ﬂat archaeological combustion structures such as
those present in the Middle Palaeolithic record remain unexplained. Such kind of combustion structures
are commonly affected by postdepositional agents and often, their only distinct, well preserved
component is a thin black lens on the ground. Hence, understanding the nature of this black lens is
essential towards archaeological interpretation. From an interdisciplinary microstratigraphic approach,
we present a case study in which for an entire experimental series of ﬂat combustion structures the black
layer represents the ﬁre-altered topsoil on which the ﬁre was made. Parallel analysis of archaeological
Middle Palaeolithic combustion structures from the site of El Salt (Alicante, Spain) reveal similar patterns,
leading to signiﬁcant implications for archaeological interpretation. In the light of these results, special
attention must be paid to the formation processes of ﬂat Middle Palaeolithic combustion features, as
black layers and the material contained in them are not necessarily linked with combustion but with
preceding activities or events. In such cases, black layers represent intact remnants of occupation
surfaces, concealing signiﬁcant behavioural and palaeoenvironmental information relevant to the
reconstruction of Middle Palaeolithic societies.
Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Combustion
Neanderthal
Middle Palaeolithic
Microstratigraphy
Micromorphology
FT-IR
Phytoliths
El Salt

1. Introduction
Archaeological combustion structures have been a central
object of study within the research of every time period since the
Eurasian Middle Palaeolithic and African Middle Stone Age, when
ﬁre started to be habitually used by humans (Roebroeks and Villa,
2011). Their interest as study objects can be explained by different
reasons, many of which have been previously pointed out. First,
the formation of combustion structures is purely anthropogenic.
Hence, they are direct transmitters of cultural and behavioural
information (1989). Second, as providers of warmth and sources of
heat for transforming food and other materials, they play
a fundamental role in the spatial structuring of human communal
life, and hence are key to understand the spatial organization of

* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ34 922 31 77 27; fax: þ34 922 31 77 23.
E-mail addresses: cmallol@ull.es, mallol@mmsh.univ-aix.fr (C. Mallol).
0305-4403/$ e see front matter Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.09.017

speciﬁc human occupations (e.g., Yellen, 1977; Galanidou, 1997;
Vaquero and Pastó, 2001; Vallverdú-Poch et al., 2005). Third, they
represent a direct stratigraphic link to the position of the human
occupation surface on which they were made, which makes them
a fundamental element of archaeological palimpsest dissection
(Stevenson, 1991; Bailey, 2007; Henry, 2012; Martínez-Moreno
et al., 2004).
In the context of Middle Palaeolithic and Middle Stone Age
archaeology, combustion features have been crucial as sources of
evidence supporting complex hominin cognition (i.e., Hayden,
2012; Meignen et al., 2007; Wadley, 2010). Palaeobotanical and
zooarchaeological studies have provided information on the
different kinds of fuel used and their effects on combustion (e.g.,
Albert et al., 2000, 2003, 2012; Albert and Cabanes, 2007;
Asmussen, 2009; Cabanes et al., 2010; Costamagno et al., 1999,
2005, 2010; Théry-Parisot et al., 1996, 2010; Théry-Parisot, 1998,
2001, 2002; Théry-Parisot and Meignen, 2000; Yravedra et al.,
2005) and microstratigraphic studies of combustion features
from different sites have documented examples of recurrent ﬁre

2516

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

making and use, as well as maintenance activities such as ash rake
out, sweeping and dumping (Berna and Goldberg, 2008; Goldberg
et al., 2009, 2012; Miller et al., 2010). The functionality of Middle
Palaeolithic ﬁre places has been a more elusive issue, although
some insight has been provided by combustion structure sedimentological analysis using organic chemistry techniques, which
have provided identiﬁcation of molecular biomarkers from speciﬁc
animal and plant species, suggesting that the presence of such taxa
in among the ﬁre residues resulted from cooking or refuse (March
et al., 2008; Sistiaga, 2010; Sistiaga et al., 2011).
The majority of documented Middle Palaeolithic and Middle
Stone Age combustion structures are ﬂat, although a few exceptions
of pit-hearths have been reported (see Dataset 1 in Roebroeks and
Villa, 2011). The standard conception of a well preserved in situ ﬂat
Middle Palaeolithic combustion structure representing a single
combustion event (i.e., from lighting to extinction) comprises
a stratiﬁed sedimentary sequence made up of a reddish-brown
layer at the base, overlain by a dark brown/black layer and capped by a white/yellowish or pinkish white layer. The average
thickness of each layer as documented in the majority of Middle
Palaeolithic and Middle Stone Age sites ranges between 1 and 3 cm.
Combustion features from most sites have been postdepositionally
affected by erosion, reworking, weathering and diagenesis or
a combination of these processes and normally the sequence is
devoid of the top white layer or contains only relict evidence of it. In
such cases, the black layer is considered the main material representative of the combustion structure and becomes a key referential feature from which to approach issues of site structure and site
functionality, as well as to situate the stratigraphic position of
a distinct occupation surface. Hence, understanding the nature of
the black layer is critical.
Yet, this has been an elusive topic. Simply, the black layer also
referred to as “carbonaceous layer” or “charcoal layer” is assumed
to be a representative component of anthropogenic combustion
activity. A general assumption operating since the ﬁrst monographic volume dedicated to prehistoric ﬁre (Leroi-Gourhan, 1973)
is that the black layer represents partially combusted or carbonized
fuel. Hence, a widespread protocol for the excavation of combustion
remains is to isolate the content of the black layer as representative
of combustion activity and to follow the topography left behind as
an occupation ﬂoor marker. However, until now, this assumption
has not been scientiﬁcally questioned.
Current data do not agree with this general assumption. There
is micromorphological evidence from experimental and archaeological ﬁres whose black layers are composed of mixed combustion residues and particles from the topsoil (Wattez, 1990) and
from ethnoarchaeological ﬁres lacking distinct black layers (Mallol
et al., 2007). Recent micromorphological studies of combustion
features from different Middle Palaeolithic sites provide clues into
the formation of the black layer, but this information is descriptive
and may lead to different interpretations. For instance, a micromorphological study of the black layers from several combustion
structures at Kebara, Israel, all of which are between 1 and 2 cm
thick, shows that they are consistently composed of a mix of siltsized charcoal fragments, terra rossa aggregates and quartz silt
(Meignen et al., 2007). The microcharcoal fragments could
represent fuel remnants associated with the combustion event.
Alternatively, they could be residues of woody plant material
accumulated either anthropogenically or by natural agents on the
occupation surface. The geogenic components (soil aggregates and
quartz grains) could also derive from the top of the substrate
or have been introduced together with the fuel at the time of
combustion. The micromorphological evidence does not unequivocally support the widespread assumption that the black layer
represents fuel remnants.

Documented combustion features from Abric Romaní, Barcelona
(Layers J and O), most of which lack a distinct ash layer, represent
a similar case. They have been interpreted as carbonaceous
anthropogenic facies composed of burnt carbonate rocks and fuelderived residues (Courty et al., 2012; Vallverdú-Poch and Courty,
2012; Vallverdú-Poch et al., 2012). However, the supporting data
does not imply that all the components of the carbonaceous layer
are associated with the combustion activity, and some of them
could belong to underlying deposits.
Micromorphological analysis of combustion feature black
layers from the rich Middle Stone Age sequence of Sibudu,
Kwazulu-Natal (Goldberg et al., 2009), has provided evidence of
two main microfacies types: 1) Fibrous organic material in charred
and humiﬁed state also containing either charcoal or phytoliths,
sand and silt, interpreted as partially burned matting, and 2)
Massive charcoal with minute ﬁbrous charcoal mixed with secretinite, burnt seeds or resin/plant gum, and fat-derived char, and
sometimes calcareous ashes. The latter microfacies has been
interpreted as representative of classic hearth bases and constitutes strong evidence of black layers possibly derived from fuel
residues.
Whether the black layer of a ﬂat combustion structure represents carbonized fuel or charred ﬁne organic material derived from
the soil substrate has important implications towards archaeological interpretation. In the ﬁrst case, the black layer is representative
of the original combustion structure and the archaeological material contained in it can be interpreted as material deposited during
the combustion event, such as food refuse or discarded objects
tossed in the ﬁre. In the second case, the same archaeological
material would be unrelated to human activity associated with
the combustion structure. Instead, it would belong to a broader
archaeological assemblage related to human activity carried out
on the occupation surface beneath the ﬁre and preceding it. It is
clear to see how the distinction between black layer as fuel or as
substrate must be made prior to excavation of the combustion
structure, in order to identify accurate archaeological assemblages
and their corresponding occupation surfaces. In this paper, we
present selected data relevant to this problem from experimental
and archaeological settings integrating contextualized micromorphological, lithic, faunal, geochemical and archeobotanical
data.
2. Material and methods
Our methods are based on the view that archaeological site
formation processes are case-speciﬁc (Goldberg and Macphail,
2006). Hence, on-site experiments aimed at replicating sitespeciﬁc archaeological features may help us to gain insight into
archaeological formation processes. In the case of combustion
structures, site-speciﬁc factors such as wind exposure and type of
sedimentary substrate are key to understand their formation,
provided that present-day conditions are comparable to former
ones. Accordingly, we carried out a series of experiments to try to
understand the archaeological combustion remains from El Salt
Middle Palaeolithic open-air site (Alicante, Spain), which has yielded evidence of recurrent Neandertal occupation dating to
between 60.7  8.9 and 45.2  3.4 ka BP (Galván et al., 1991, 2006a,
2006b, submitted for publication; Dorta et al., 2010; Gómez et al.,
2010; Machado et al., 2011; Marrero et al., 2011; Sistiaga et al.,
2011).
We made 24 experimental ﬁres in the immediate surroundings of the excavation during the 2010 season (Mallol et al.,
submitted for publication). The materials and variables tested
were chosen according to preexisting hypotheses about the
functionality and formation processes of the combustion

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

assemblages recovered from this archaeological site. The same
variables were tested in different experiments to ensure duplicated results. The ﬁres were made in the open air a few metres
from the excavation area to replicate the archaeological setting. In
ﬁres that did not involve subsequent trampling or other postcombustion actions, thermocouples were inserted at ground
level, 1e3 cm below the ground and in the ﬂames. The number of
thermocouples in each ﬁre was constrained by logistical factors
such as space restrictions and ranged between 3 and 13. The
weather conditions remained constant throughout the experimental season; average warm temperatures of 28e33  C, with
a prevailing lack of rain and wind, except for a few incidences of
brief summer rainstorms (usually during the night) and breezy
days with random strong squalls.
Combustion residues were sampled (for micromorphology, bulk
geochemistry and phytolith analysis) along with adjacent control
sediment samples. Some of the combustion features were excavated in August, 2010, while others remain in situ for taphonomic
control.
Here, we present data from 7 ﬁres that were excavated, sampled
and analysed and for which we have complete datasets. These are:
NFT-3, a ﬁre trampled for 20 days; NFT-6, relit daily on 7 consecutive

2517

days with a fresh layer of ivy leaves between each combustion;
NFT-8, NFT-14 and NFT-15, one-time combustion events lasting
6:30, 7 and 3 h respectively; and NFT-24 and NFT-16, two ﬁres made
on top of each other and extinguished with sediment (NFT-16) and
water (NFT-24) (Table 1). Although data collection for the rest of the
ﬁres is ongoing, preliminary results suggest that they conform to the
patterns observed in the data presented here.
The substrate on which the ﬁres were made conforms to the
lithology documented in the archaeological deposit and varies
slightly in its organic content: Table 2 shows a summary of the
macroscopic and microscopic features observed in control samples
of the different substrate types on which the ﬁres were made. NFT3, -6 and -16 were made on bare, dry ground, NFT-8 on wet ground,
NFT-14 on sparsely vegetated ground, NFT-15 on dry, compact
sediment and NFT-24 on freshly dumped sediment.
Regarding the archaeological sample, six combustion features
from El Salt site were selected for comparison with our experimental data: H-30, H-32, H-33, H-43, H-44 and H-45. These belong
to the stratigraphic unit under current excavation (S.U. X) and are
associated with archaeological remains and sedimentary facies
excavated, sampled and documented according to a methodology
geared at the identiﬁcation of human occupation episodes. The

Table 1
Main variables of experimental ﬁres.
Fire ID

Substrate

Relightings

Thermo- Fuela
couples

Fire feeding
timeb

Actions during combustion

Extinction Post-combustion
actions or events

NFT 3

Type 1

None

None

5.4 kg of standard.

3h

At 10 min, ﬂint knapping debris
tossed in ﬁre.
At 30 min, 150 g of pork ribs
with meat tossed in the ﬁre.
At 1 h 15 min, dry horse
excrements tossed in the ﬁre.

Natural

NFT 6

Type 1

7, on the
None
following
7 consecutive
days.

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:

NFT 8
NFT 14

Type 2
Type 3

None
None

8
9

1: 9.3 kg of standard.
2: 8.8 kg of standard
including leftover
half-burned branches
and dry bark.
3: 14.7 kg of standard
4: 7 kg of standard
including leftover
half-burned branches.
5: 10.5 kg of standard
including leftover
half-burned branches.
6: 5 kg of standard.
7: 7.5 kg of standard.
6: 13.6 kg of standard.
28 kg of standard.
16.2 kg of standard
including 1 semidry
and 1 rotten branch

NFT 15

Type 4

None

13

NFT 24/16 Loose dry
1 (NFT-24),
sediment/Type 1 after 3 days.

3

2
2
2
5
1
2
4
2

h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h

23 min
35 min
18 min
5 min
50 min
35 min

1: At 20 min, 200 g Pork ribs
Natural
tossed in ﬁre.
2: At 40 min, human baby
excrements tossed in ﬁre.
3: At 1 h 20 min, 200 g Pork
meat tossed in ﬁre.
4: At 1 h, 12 horse bone fragments
40 min tossed in ﬁre and removed after
carbonization.
4: At 2 h, ﬂint knapping
by the ﬁre.

6 h 30 min
7h

None
At 1 h, limestone cobble tossed
in ﬁre.
At 7 h, owl pellets (Bubo bubo)
tossed in the ﬁre.
At 7 h 30 min, ﬂint ﬂakes
tossed in the ﬁre.
4.9 kg of standard and 3 h
At 1 h 40 min, a whole pigeon
3 kg of dry bark.
tossed in the ﬁre
1: 10 kg of standard
1: 1 h 40 min 1: At 1 h 40 min, ﬂint knapping
and dry pine cones.
2: 3 h 10 min dust tossed in ﬁre,
2: 9.5 kg of standard
and 4 kg of dry sediment dumped.
including leftover
2: At 15 min, 4 deer ribs
half-burned branches
cooked on embers.
and a dry blackberry
branch.
At 1 h and at 2 h 40 min, eaten

After 3 days, 3
calcined horse bone
fragments added to
the combustion.
Affected by a 2 h-long
summer rainstorm
with heavy drops.
Trampled for 20 days.
Covering with a bed of
green ivy leaves after
each combustion event.
These were left in place
slightly trampled at the
start of each
combustion event.
Affected by a 2 h-long
summer rainstorm with
heavy drops
(after combustion 5).

Natural
Natural

None
None

Natural

None

1: Dry
None
sediment.
2: Water.

deer ribs tossed in ﬁre.
At 3 h 40 min, water dumped.
a
b

The standard fuel used was dry Pinus nigra naturally fallen wood: Medium and small branches as the main structure and pine needles and twigs as tinder.
From lighting to smouldering, or when no more fuel is added to the ﬁre.

2518

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Table 2
General description of substrate types involved in the experiments (top 5 cm).
Substrate
type

Corresponding
ﬁres

Macroscopic features

Microscopic features

1

NFT-3
NFT-6
NFT-16

Flat surface. Very pale brown, dry, with no vegetal cover
except for isolated dry grass stalks. Loose surface detritus
including common silt, sand, and limestone gravel, as well
as isolated dry twigs, seeds and leaves.

2

NFT-8

3

NFT-14

Flat surface. Dark yellowish brown, wet, with other features
like Type 1. Resulted from dumping 11 l of water the night
before the ﬁre was made.
Slightly sloping surface. Brown, dry, lightly vegetated cover
(moss and isolated grass stalks). Loose silty and sandy
aggregates. Isolated dry twigs, seeds and leaves.

Massive sandy clay with common unsorted subangular
limestone and tufa gravel and sand and few angular, unsorted
quartz sand grains. Few zig-zag planes and medium
channels (200e250 mm) ﬁlled with fresh rootlets. Abundant
organic silt-sand fraction including plant residues (orange, red,
brown and black-brown concentrations of amorphous matter,
tissue, individual cells and punctuations, here onwards “OM”)
and subangular bone fragments (pale yellow); few ascribed to
microfauna and others undiagnostic).
Unavailable

4

NFT-15

Small depression. Very pale brown, dry, with no vegetal
cover. Compact (strongly cemented) silty sand with common
limestone gravel. Scattered windblown twigs, seeds, leaves
and tufa grains.

5

NFT-24

Flat surface. Very pale brown, loose unconsolidated sandy clay.

selected combustion features belong to diachronous archaeological
facies associations (Fig. 1).
2.1. Micromorphological analysis
Three oriented sediment samples were collected from the
remains of each experimental ﬁre and its underlying substrate (2
samples from the interior and 1 control sample of adjacent sediment). Archaeological sampling involved between one and three
samples from each combustion feature and its underlying sediment. Previously collected samples from archaeological sediment
adjacent to the combustion features were analysed as control
samples. The blocks were collected by applying a plaster cast using
damp tissue paper and gypsum-impregnated gauze. In the lab, the
oriented blocks were oven-dried at 60  C for two days and subsequently impregnated in a mix of polyester resin, styrene and
a catalyser (MEKP) in a 7:3:0.1 ratio. After curing for two weeks, the
hardened blocks were cut into 1 cm-thick slabs, which were then
shipped to Spectrum Petrographics Inc. (Vancouver, US) for
medium sized (7 cm  5 cm  30 mm) thin section manufacture.
Micromorphological descriptions follow the standard guidelines of
Stoops (2003). Special attention was paid to presence/absence of
ﬁssures as potential thermal alteration markers. Bone specimens
were categorically described as pale yellow, pale yellow with
brown edges, thermally altered brown and calcined. Pale yellow
bone is simply described and not interpreted (as unburnt), as
it could represent low-temperature burning. In experimental

Subangular blocky sandy clay with common unsorted subangular
limestone and tufa gravel, sand and silt and few angular, unsorted
quartz sand grains. Common medium channels ﬁlled with fresh
rootlets. Abundant orange, red, brown and blackebrown OM
and very few rounded pale yellow bone fragments and rounded
charcoal fragments.
Massive, compact sandy calcitic clay with few small vughs
(100 mm) and few large planes. Common unsorted subangular
limestone and tufa gravel, sand and silt and few angular, quartz
ﬁne sand grains. Inorganic, with only isolated punctuations and
fresh rootlets in large planes. Common rounded pale yellow
bone fragments and few rounded charcoal fragments.
Unavailable

samples, plant residues are interpreted as charred when they are
black in comparison with orange and red control counterparts. In
archaeological samples, interpretation is more ambiguous, based
on context (presence of thermally altered bone and ﬂint) and
absence of micromorphological features indicative of advanced
humiﬁcation (Babel, 1975).
2.2. Mineralogy and phytoliths
Mineralogical and phytolith analyses were carried out on 30
archaeological sediment samples collected from 4 different
combustion features. Mineralogical composition was analysed
using an iS5 FT-IR Nicolet Thermo Scientiﬁc Spectrometer.
Infrared spectra were obtained using KBr pellets at 4 cm1
resolution. In addition to mineralogical composition, speciﬁc
absorptions in the clay spectrum were analysed to identify clays
exposed to high temperatures (Berna et al., 2007). Phytolith
concentrations in the sediments were determined using the
method of Katz et al. (2010). This method is based on the dissolution of carbonates and phosphates by adding 50 ml of 6N HCl to
about 20 mg of sediment, and the separation of the phytoliths and
lighter elements from the rest of the fraction using 450 ml of
sodium polytungstate (2.4 g/ml density). Phytoliths were counted
and identiﬁed using an Olympus BX-41 optical microscope at
200 and 400. Identiﬁcation of phytolith morphotypes was
carried out using the standard literature (Twiss et al., 1969;
Mulholland and George Rapp, 1992; Piperno, 1988, 2006). The

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram illustrating the stratigraphic position of the archaeological combustion features analysed. La7e9 and XB are different facies associations within S.U. X.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2519

International Code for Phytolith Nomenclature was followed
where possible (Madella et al., 2005).
2.3. Lithic and faunal remains

Fig. 2. Temperatures recorded at 10 min intervals in the topsoils (0e3 cm) of experimental ﬁres from lighting to smouldering. No thermocouples were inserted in the
ground for NFT-3 (trampled ﬁre) and NFT-24 (a ﬁre made on top of NFT-16).

The analysis focused on the degree of thermal alteration of lithic
and faunal objects in relation to their stratigraphic position within
and adjacent to combustion structures. For the lithics, macroscopic
variables observed were: Colour, breaks, thermal extractions,
scales, ﬁssures and thermal gloss (Clemente, 1997) using previously
obtained referential thermal alteration patterns for the ﬂint types
documented at El Salt (Dorta et al., 2010) and literature on the topic
(Domanski and Webb, 1992, 2007; Domanski et al., 2009; Mercieca
and Hiscock, 2008).
Analysis of the archaeological faunal remains involved the
following steps: 1) Taxonomic identiﬁcation. Rabbit e Oryctolagus
cuniculus, which at El Salt has been shown to derive from owl
pellets (Sanchis, 2000, 2012; Yravedra, 2006a) was considered as
non-anthropogenic input; 2) Recording of the degree of burning,
which was established following six different thermal alteration

Fig. 3. Field views of black layers from experimental ﬁres during excavation.

2520

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

stages: Brown, browneblack, black, blackegrey, grey and white
(Lyman, 1994). No interpretation regarding burning temperatures
was made given the unresolved state of current debates on this
topic (Lyman, 1994; Yravedra, 2006b). The ambiguity is partly due
to the diversity of factors inﬂuencing the effect of ﬁre on bone
(internal and external bone structure, environmental conditions,
combustion time, position within the structure.etc.).
3. Results
3.1. Experimental combustion structures
Summarized descriptions of the sedimentary combustion residues from the experimental ﬁres are presented in Appendix A.
Fig. 2 shows temperatures recorded in the topsoil (0e3 cm) from
lighting to smouldering. First, we will outline a series of patterns

observed in all the experiments, followed by remarks speciﬁc to
particular ﬁres and brief comments on the lithic and faunal
remains.
None of the ﬁres showed a stratiﬁed sequence in which one of
the layers was exclusively composed of incompletely combusted
fuel (charcoal). In all cases, the residual wood charcoal fragments
were contained within the top ash layer, which was resting directly
on the ground. The black layers (Fig. 3) represent the top 0.5e1.5 cm
of the sedimentary substrate on which the ﬁres were made,
according to a matching correspondence with the microscopic
components observed in the control samples (Appendix A). The
main features observed in the thermally altered soil as different
from control samples were: 1) Microaggregation of the topsoil (up
to 5 mm), 2) Horizontal ﬁssuring of the sedimentary mass (between
5 mm and 3 cm) (Fig. 4) and 3) Carbonization of the silt-sized
organic particles (Fig. 5).

Fig. 4. Partial thin section scans of combustion residues from two different experimental ﬁres: a) NFT-6, made on unvegetated, dry soil and b) NFT-14, made on sparsely vegetated
soil. The main microstructural effects of combustion on the substrate were blackening of the top cm and microaggregation at the surface (almost 1 cm in a and only a few mm in b)
Scale bar ¼ 1 cm. In a, microaggregation is underlain by ﬁssuring up to a few cm in depth, while no microstructural changes were identiﬁed in b below the microaggregated
segment. c) Detail of contact between microaggregated and ﬁssured topsoil in a (plane polarized light e PPL); d) Microphotograph of a control sample collected adjacent to one of
the ﬁres. Note the massive microstructure of the natural, unburnt soil (PPL).

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2521

Fig. 5. Microphotographs showing ﬁre-altered OM in black layers resulting from different experimental ﬁres (a. NFT-8, b. NFT-14) compared to unburnt OM in control samples of
adjacent soil (c, d). All images in PPL.

Besides these common features, some of the ﬁres provided
additional signiﬁcant information:
 In the ﬁeld, the top of the NFT-14 black layer, which resulted
from burning on a sparsely vegetated substrate, yielded a dark
olive brown colour. Microscopically, we observed microaggregated sandy clay with charred moss and grass rootlets,
capped by anatomically connected phytoliths (Fig. 6a, b and c).
 In NFT-3, a ﬁre trampled on 21 consecutive days, calcitic ash
was incorporated into the black layer as reworked aggregates
(Fig. 6c and d). At a microstructural level, the sediment was
miroaggregated and showed carbonized organic silt, as in the
other cases.
 Two ﬁres, NFT-8 and NFT-15, did not yield continuous black
layers. In NFT-8, the charcoal-rich ash layer was underlain by
reddish-yellow and black patches of sediment (Fig. 7).
In localized areas there was a juxtaposition of the reddishyellow and black patches. At a microstructural level, the reddish-yellow patches showed microaggregation and horizontal ﬁssuring but the organic-silt fraction contained in them
was not thermally affected (Fig. 7a and b). The black patches
were also ﬁssured and their ﬁne organic matter (hereonwards
OM) was thermally altered (Fig. 7c and d).
 In NFT-15, a ﬁre made on a compact, inorganic sedimentary
substrate, the charcoal-rich ash layer was underlain by 0.5 cm
of reddish-yellow sediment capped by a thin (10 mm) black
lining of minute charcoal, punctuations and microaggregates
(Fig. 7e and f). When compared with the control sample, this
reddish sediment is weakly ﬁssured.
Table 3 contains information about the stratigraphic position
and degrees of thermal alteration of the material remains

associated with each ﬁre and their macroscopic features. Overall,
materials tossed in the ﬁre were excavated within the ash layer.
Exceptions are NFT-3, the trampled ﬁre, in which this material was
found in the black layer and NFT-6, which yielded a ﬂint assemblage
in the periphery of the black layer derived from ﬂint knapping by
the ﬁre during combustion event 4. We also note that some ﬂint
objects placed on the surface prior to combustion showed explosive
breakage at high temperatures (>400  C), and that some of the
resulting fragments were ejected several metres outwards. In
contrast, lithics buried under the experimental surface (e.g.,
NFT-10-10, not presented here) shattered in situ (Mallol et al.,
submitted for publication).
3.2. Archaeological combustion structures
3.2.1. Sedimentary aspects
Appendix B shows a summary of the macroscopic and microscopic sedimentary features observed in the selected S.U. X
archaeological combustion features from El Salt. Mineralogical (FTIR) and phytolith data is presented in Table 5. We will comment ﬁrst
on relevant observations relating to the black layer, and then on the
other different kinds of layers documented (ash, reddish brown and
unaltered sediment underlying and adjacent to the combustion
structures).
In the six cases analysed, the archaeological black layer (Figs. 8
and 9) consists of microaggregated sandy sediment made up of
carbonized plant litter and unsorted detritic mineral components
in approximately 1:1 ratio. More than 50% of the mineral fraction is
unsorted detritic recrystallized tufa ranging from granules to very
ﬁne sand-sized grains. There are minor proportions (<5%) of quartz
sand, calcitic Celtis fruit seed coats and a few scattered, ﬁssured ﬂint
ﬂakes (1e2 mm in length). There is a small amount of clay, which is

2522

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Fig. 6. a) Field view of NFT-14 during excavation of the black layer. Note the greenish-grey colour at its surface. b) Microphotograph of the NFT-14 stratiﬁed sequence (from base to
top): Microaggregated topsoil, in situ charred grass and moss, phytoliths in anatomical connection, ﬁssured ﬂint and calcitic ash containing charcoal fragments. c) Detail of
anatomically connected phytoliths. d) Microphotograph of NFT-3 combustion residues showing preserved topsoil microaggregation and ﬁssuring. e) Detail of trampled NFT-3
combustion residues showing common fragmented charcoal and bundled calcitic ash. All images in PPL. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

not thermally altered. The rest of the space is ﬁlled with weakly
bedded brown-to-black plant litter (leaf, stem and root fragments,
ligniﬁed tissue, epidermis fragments, indistinct organic particles
and associated spores and fungal hyphae) (Figs. 10 and 11) and
minor proportions (5%) of diverse coprolitic residues including
black to brown, subrounded, ﬁbrous, spongy fragments (Fig. 12a
and b), massive fragments (Fig. 12c and d) and fragments with
amorphous inﬁllings (Fig. 12e and f). Bone fragments are scarce,
mostly of microfauna, and exhibit pale to orange colour (see Fig. 10).
Charcoal fragments are rare and ﬁssured. All the black layers are
channelled by biogalleries, some of which are partially ﬁlled with
enchytraeid earthworm faecal pellets (see Fig. 10).
Four of the combustion features e H-32, H-30, H-33 and H-44,
yielded relatively well preserved ash layers. Their FT-IR spectra

resemble those from the black layers and underlying sediment in
that they show calcite and clay in different proportions, together
with lesser amounts of dahllite and quartz. The H-32 and H-44 ash
layers contain more calcite than clay, while clay is slightly more
abundant in H-30 and H-45 ash layers. Clay in the ash layers is
thermally altered.
Micromorphologically, all the ash layers show characteristic
microcrystalline calcium carbonate polygonal and elongated
aggregates and amorphous domains comparable to our experimental ash samples (Fig. 13a and b). Additional morphologies
including aligned cellular calcium oxalate crystals from leafs
(Canti, 2003), Celtis sp. seed coats and other unidentiﬁed cells and
tissues exhibiting delicate, moss-like morphologies were observed
in H-44 (Fig. 13e and f). The primary nature of the latter needs

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2523

Fig. 7. Field view (a) and partial thin section scan (b) of combustion residues from NFT-8. Note the juxtaposition of ﬁssured rubeﬁed and blackened topsoil. c) Micrograph of
rubeﬁed topsoil. Note the presence of unburnt OM. d) Micrograph of charred OM in blackened topsoil. e) Micrograph showing the NFT-15 rubeﬁed inorganic topsoil capped by a thin
black lining. f) Detail of the NFT-15 topsoil showing microaggregation and minute charcoal fragments. Views in PPL.

further investigation, as these calciﬁed tissue fragments could
represent postdepositional plant growth in the wood ash layer. In
the ﬁeld, a dark olive brown sedimentary layer was identiﬁed
between the ash and black layers of H-32 (Fig. 14). Microscopically,
this layer is composed of reddened granular sediment (Fig. 14c)
containing calcined bone (Fig. 14c and d), amorphous, phosphaterich coprolites with unidentiﬁed inclusions (Fig. 14e and f) and

rare OM. FT-IR spectra from this layer shows a mix of calcite and
unaltered clay.
Excavation of H-44, which was recognized in the ﬁeld as a large,
complex feature with a reddish brown segment between the white
and black layers (Fig. 15a and b), yielded the following microstratigraphic sequence (from base to top): 1) A characteristic black
layer as the others previously described, 2) Microaggregated

2524

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Table 3
Stratigraphic position and description of thermally altered ﬂint items associated
with the experimental combustion structures.
Combustion Stratigraphic position
feature ID
NFT-3
NFT-6

NFT-8

NFT-14

Descriptiona

Black Layer
Analysis pending.
White Layer, Black Layer White Layer: Stage 3 ﬂakes (2).
and Black Layer periphery Black Layer: Stage 1 (11), Stage 2 (3)
and Stage 3 (1) ﬂakes.
Black Layer periphery: Stage 2 (5)
and Stage 1 (8) ﬂakes and a
Stage 1e2 microdebris accumulations.
White Layer
Stage 3 (5) and Stage 2 (5) ﬂakes
and two Stage 3 microdebris
accumulations.
White and Black Layer
White Layer: Stage 1 (3), Stage 2 (1)
and Stage 3 (12) ﬂakes and six
Stage 3 microdebris accumulations.
Black Layer: Stage 1 (1) and
Stage 3 (10) ﬂakes and two Stages 1
and 3 microdebris accumulations.

a
Referential thermal alteration burning stages (Dorta et al., 2010): 1 ¼ 300e
400  C ¼ ; 2 ¼ 400e550  C; 3 ¼ 550e700  C.

reddish brown sediment composed of thermally altered clay and
containing calcitic ash inclusions, calcined bone and tufa grains and
rare organic punctuations (Fig. 15c and d), 3) A heterogeneous
calcitic ash layer, as previously described (see Fig. 13e and f), and 4)
a thin couplet of calcitic ash and thermally altered sediment rich in
charred OM (Fig. 15e and f). One thin section showed an additional
millimetric lamina of calcitic ash mixed with carbonized particles
capping the sequence.
The sediment adjacent to and underlying the archaeological
black layers is composed of unaltered clay and is identical to them
in its lithological composition (Table 4, Fig. 16a and b) but there is
a near absence of plant litter residues except for common organic
punctuations and isolated or concentrated, anatomically connected

phytoliths (Fig. 16c and d). Bone, coprolites and charcoal are represented similarly to the black layers. Regarding the latter, the
excavation record indicates that the majority of charcoal fragments
larger than 1 cm were found in sediment outside the combustion
features, not within them.
3.2.2. Phytoliths
Regarding phytolith concentrations, these range from 3 to 12
million with an average of 5.6  2.0 in all the samples analysed,
regardless of provenience. Besides a few individual samples, there
are no signiﬁcant differences in phytolith concentrations among
combustion features or layers within them (Table 5). The percentage
of weathered morphotypes does not exceed 15% and anatomically
connected phytoliths (multicells) are relatively abundant in all the
samples, indicating good phytolith preservation. The presence of
anatomically connected phytoliths is not related to sediment type
with the exception of H-30, where multicells are more abundant in
the ash and black layers than in the underlying sediment.
Roughly, all the samples show a similar phytolith assemblage,
characterized by a high presence of Celtis fruits, and in the following
order smaller amounts of phytoliths from grass leaves, wood and
bark, dicotyledonous leaves and grass inﬂorescence (Fig. 17). Note
that the H-32 and H-44 ash layers show more wood and bark than
grass phytoliths, and that the H-30 ash layer shows the same
amount of grass inﬂorescence than grass leaves. The high presence
of dicotyledonous leaves in the H-44 dark olive brown layer is also
noteworthy. Taking into account differences in phytolith production among grasses, dicotyledonous leaves and wood and bark, the
proportion of non-grass phytoliths is considerably high in all the
samples (Albert and Weiner, 2001).
3.2.3. Lithic and faunal remains
Appendix C contains summarized descriptions of the stratigraphic position and degrees of burning of the archaeological
material excavated from the ash and black layers and associated

Table 4
General description of El Salt e S.U. X sedimentary subunits associated with the archaeological combustion features mentioned in the text.
Stratigraphic
subunit

Corresponding
combustion
features

Macroscopic features

Microscopic features

La8

H30
H32
H33

Light brown, granular sandy clay with common
limestone and tufa gravel and pebbles. It is
present in the entire excavated area, being
thickest away from the back wall (8 cm) and
pinching out at the wall. It forms a relatively
ﬂat, microtopographically irregular surface.

La 9

H43

XB

H44
H45

It underlies La8 with a sharp contact and shows
very similar color and texture and irregular
surface. It is thickest at the centre of the
excavated area (5 cm) and disappears towards
the periphery (towards and away from the back
wall). It contains abundant remains
of Oryctolagus cuniculus.
It underlies La9 and La10 (a lens documented
towards the centre of the excavated area) with
a sharp erosional contact. It is reddish brown
and ﬁner-grained than the overlying deposits.
It contains a signiﬁcantly lower proportion of
limestone and tufa gravel. It remains unexcavated
and its estimated thickness (from proﬁle
observation) is 10 cm at the wall, pinching out
a few metres away from the wall. It has yielded
common cm-sized charcoal fragments
throughout the excavation area.

Massive and locally granular, poorly sorted sandy clay
containing quartz (5% vfs-fs, 1% cs-vcs), rounded
fossiliferous limestone (20e30% vfs-fs) and subrounded
recrystallized tufa (30% vcs-granules-pebbles); Abundant
Celtis sp. seed coats; common pale brown coprolites
(ﬁbrous and spongy, as well as massive with quartz grains
and phytoliths); Common pale yellow bone and very few
ﬁssured charcoal fragments.
Same lithology as La8 with a higher proportion and better
sorting of tufa granules and pebbles, which are fresh; Rare
shell fragments. No Celtis sp. seed coats or coprolites identiﬁed;
Few ﬁssured charcoal fragments; Common pale yellow bone.

Unavailable

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2525

Table 5
FT-IR results, phytolith concentration per gram of sediment, percentage of anatomical connected phytoliths (multicells), average cell number forming the anatomical connected phytoliths, and percentage of weathered morphotypes. Minerals in FT-IR results are sorted by peak height; “¼” means similar peak height for both minerals.
Combustion feature

Sediment

FT-IR results

Phytoliths in 1 g
of sediment (millions)

% Anatomical connected
phytoliths (Multicells)

Average cell number
in anatomical connected
phytoliths

% Weathered
morphotypes

H30

Ash
Black
Brown
Brown
Reddish Br.
Reddish Br.
Ash
Ash
Black
Black
Black
Black
Dark Olive
Ash
Ash
Ash
Ash
Ash
Ash
Black
Black
Black
Black
Brown
Dark Olive
Reddish Br.
Reddish Br.
Ash
Black
Black

Cl (b?), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca (na), Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Ca (va), Cl (b?), Dh (t)
Ca (va), Clay (b?), Qz (t)
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Qz
Ca¼Cl (nb), Qz (la), Dh (t)
Ca¼Cl (nb), Qz (la), Dh (t)
Cl (nb), Ca, Qz
Ca, Cl (b?), Dh, Qz
Ca, Cl (b?), Dh, Qz
Cl (b?)¼Ca, Dh, Qz
Ca, Cl (b?), Dh, Qz
Cl (b?)¼Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Qz (t), Dh (t)
Ca, Cl (b), Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (nb), Ca, Qz, Dh (t)
Ca¼Cl (b), Dh, Qz (t)
Ca, Cl (b?), Dh, Qz
Cl (b), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (b?), Ca, Dh, Qz
Cl (b?), Ca, Qz (t), Dh (t)
Cl (nb) ¼ Ca, Qz (t), Dh (t)
Cl (nb), Ca, Qz (t), Dh (t)

4.4
5.7
7.0
4.7
9.5
8.1
5.2
4.5
4.9
5.3
4.6
5.7
4.1
5.6
5.8
12.5
3.5
5.5
3.1
7.3
4.8
5.3
6.1
9.6
4.6
3.8
4.8
6.2
4.1
3.7

24.5
20.1
7.5
16.7
9.7
15.3
17.3
25.2
15.4
3.4
15.8
5.6
1.4
16.1
0.0
31.1
16.4
8.9
22.6
16.9
9.0
12.7
8.3
11.5
20.1
17.8
29.0
17.6
9.6
17.2

3.6
4.4
4.0
3.4
3.1
3.5
4.5
5.3
7.2
2.7
3.4
2.6
3.0
3.0
0.0
5.8
4.0
2.7
10.8
5.5
5.0
4.0
2.8
3.3
9.0
3.9
7.3
6.6
3.0
4.5

10.3
7.6
7.5
7.7
7.3
9.9
8.1
5.8
6.8
5.1
8.5
6.9
5.3
7.3
9.7
7.8
13.1
12.1
8.0
8.8
9.9
6.9
9.2
10.0
12.1
14.5
5.6
4.6
6.8
5.3

H32

H44

H45

Cl ¼ clay; Ca ¼ calcite; Dh ¼ dahllite; Qz ¼ quartz; (b) ¼ burnt clay; (nb) ¼ unburnt clay; (na) ¼ not abundant; (va) ¼ very abundant; (t) ¼ traces.

(overlying, underlying and adjacent) sediment. All the layers analysed contain a mix of thermally altered and unaltered bone and
lithics and overall, there are less archaeological remains in ash
layers than in black layers. Bone fragments in ash layers are not
commonly calcined. From a taxonomic perspective, medium size
mammals, O. cuniculus and undeterminate fragments are equally
represented in all the combustion features and exhibit similar
thermal alteration stages except O. cuniculus, which is rarely
calcined. The assemblage yielded a relatively low number of
Perissodactyls, which were identiﬁed in two combustion features:
In H-32, as thermally altered fragments in sediment adjacent to the
combustion feature and as unburnt fragments within the ash layer,
and in H-43, thermally altered within the black layer and unburnt
in adjacent sediment outside the feature. The black layers yielded
predominantly unburnt faunal remains except in H-44, which
yielded a single calcined fragment.
Regarding the lithics, none were identiﬁed in the H-32 ash layer.
Lithic objects from the other ash layers (H-30, H-33 and H-44)
exhibit high degrees of thermal alteration (67.34% of the items
show features derived from burning at >500  C). Most of these
(93.87%) are thermal shatter products smaller than 2 cm. In
contrast, few lithic objects were recorded in sediment overlying the
ash layers; These are larger than 2 cm, usually belong to the same
raw material type, and do not exhibit any signs of thermal alteration (e.g., sediment overlying H-44).
In the black layers, the quantity of lithics varies, ranging from 85
(H-44) to 8 (H-45) objects. These are generally positioned at the top
and base of the layer e not excluding the presence of random
objects in the middle. Although small items (<2 cm) prevail, all the
black layers contain objects of between 2 and 4.5 cm. All of these
materials are technologically similar to ones from adjacent areas
unrelated to combustion and different from the small shatter debris

found in the ash layers. The former include cores, plein débitage
ﬂakes and retouched pieces. Regarding thermal alteration, lithic
objects in the black layers are predominantly altered (84%), usually
at broader yet lower (300e450  C) temperature ranges than the
lithics in ash layers. Three particular objects stand out: Two from H44 and one from H-43. They were broken into pieces and exhibit
thermal alteration features representing burning at >400  C.
Interestingly, reﬁtting fragments were found together, indicating in
situ breakage.
4. Discussion
4.1. General remarks
Blackening of the top cm of the substrate resulting from
incomplete combustion of the organic matter contained therein,
was observed in the all the experimental combustion residues of
ﬁres made on either sparsely vegetated or bare dry ground containing subsoil OM. This indicates that during combustion, the
topsoil reached 200  C, the estimated temperature at which charring starts (González-Pérez et al., 2004). Our temperature data
should be taken with caution given the limitations of thermocouple
measurements in the light of the complexity of temperature ﬂuctuation in an open air ﬁre context. Turning to the data, values close
to 200  C are in agreement with our recorded temperature yields
from NFT-8 (black patches) and NFT-16 (see Fig. 2) and in
disagreement with our record for NFT-14, which yielded a black
layer but did not reach topsoil temperatures above 125  C. Possibly,
our thermocouple was incorrectly positioned deeper into the
ground. Alternatively, the charring we observe microscopically
represents early stage OM caramelization, which according to the
Maillard Reaction is produced between 100 and 154  C (Ellis, 1959).

2526

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Fig. 8. Field views of the S.U. X combustion features studied here. Scale bars are 50 cm and white arrows indicate North.

Microaggregation and loss of the organic fraction at the top mm of
the substrate, observed throughout the experimental samples, is in
agreement with patterns of heat-induced topsoil aggregation
documented in wildﬁre contexts as resulting from complete
oxidation of part of the OM and fusion of poorly crystallized
mineral components (Ulery and Graham, 1993; Giovannini and
Lucchesi, 1997; Terefe et al., 2008; Mataix-Solera et al., 2011).
Further data collection regarding soil surface temperatures of
experimental ﬁres is necessary to accurately determine the point of
onset of OM charring.
Variation in the duration of the ﬁres, ranging from 1 to 7 h, and
the amount of fuel used, from 2 kg to 28 kg did not affect the
features of the resulting black layer. In all cases, its depth was not
more than 2 cm e in agreement with the low thermal conductivity

of a dry mineral soil e its composition was predominantly charred
OM and its microstructure showed microaggregation and ﬁssuring.
However, a ﬁre made on an inorganic substrate (NFT-15) did not
yield a black layer, suggesting that the organic content of the topsoil
is a determining factor in the formation of the black layer. The
topsoil temperature record in this ﬁre did not go above 50 (see
Fig. 2), corroborating the poor heat conductivity of inorganic
sediment. Nonetheless, the available temperature data is insufﬁcient and needs further conﬁrmation.
NFT-8, a ﬁre made on wet ground, resulted in a patchy
reddened/blackened substrate. Locally, black patches underlie
reddened patches. Microscopic observation showed that the OM
contained in the black patches is ﬁre-altered while that in the
reddened patches is not. A possible explanation for this pattern is

Fig. 9. Field views of the combustion feature sections sampled for microstratigraphic analysis. Arrows indicate the position of the black layers.

Fig. 10. Microphotographs showing charred OM in the archaeological black layers. All images in PPL.

2528

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Fig. 11. Close-up microscopic views charred OM in the archaeological black layers. All images in PPL.

that the soil moisture content was not homogeneous and, as soil
moisture increases thermal conductivity because water is a better
thermal conductor than air (Chandler et al., 1983) zones that
remained wet or moist at the time of combustion were not thermally affected or affected last. Given that the thermocouple record
indicates temperatures below 100  C at the top of the substrate and
these are too low for mineralogical transformation of iron oxides,
reddening of these moist zones could have resulted from mineral
dehydroxylation upon fast water evaporation. Further mineralogical analysis of the clay fraction in dry and moist experimental ﬁres
in comparison with the control samples will help solve this issue,
which could have signiﬁcant implications towards interpretation of
rubeﬁed archaeological combustion features.
Turning to the Middle Palaeolithic combustion features from El
Salt, ﬁrst, we corroborate their primary nature from absence of
characteristic micromorphological features of reworking (Courty
et al., 1989; Miller et al., 2010). Relatively good mineralogical
preservation states are corroborated by the FT-IR data. Although

a bone source for the ubiquitous mineral dahllite cannot be
completely ruled out, the presence of this phosphate mineral in all
the samples suggest a diagenetic process affecting previously
deposited carbonates (Karkanas et al., 2000). In agreement with the
observed microstratigraphic composition of the sediment samples,
this might be related to the presence of high amounts of organic
matter rich in phosphates (Shahack-Gross et al., 2004), and also
points to some postdepositional volume reduction of the sedimentary mass.
In accordance with our experimental results,
1) For combustion features with preserved calcitic ash layers (H30, H-32, H-33 and H-44), these represent pine wood ash, in
addition to unidentiﬁed plants in H-44;
2) The contacts between the ash layers and underlying deposits
are sharp;
3) The black layers are capped by a mm-thick segment of microaggregated inorganic sediment;

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2529

Fig. 12. Different kinds of coprolitic phosphatic grains found within the archaeological black layers: a, b) Fibrous, spongy grains; a from H-30 and b from H-45; c, d) Massive grains
with organic punctuations and quartz silt (from H-45); e, f) Massive grains with unidentiﬁed amorphous inclusions and seed fragments (from H-32). All images in PPL except
d (crossed polarized light - XPL).

4) All of the archaeological black layers represent ﬁre-altered
organo-mineral deposits rich in plant litter, with rather few
charcoal fragments, no ash and rare animal fat-derived char
fragments. Overall, the thickness of these black layers varies
according to their stratigraphic position (e.g., H32, H30 and
H33 are all 1.5e2 cm thick; H44-1 and H45 are both 2 cm thick)
but never exceeds 2 cm. Their bulk composition in comparison
with adjacent and underlying archaeological sediment (unrelated to combustion features) is strikingly similar. Their main
difference lies in the presence or absence of ﬁre-altered plant
litter.
5) Only ash layer samples stand out by their mineralogical
composition (presence of calcite and altered clay) and by their
combustion feature-speciﬁc phytolith types (e.g., wood and
bark phytoliths). The black layer sediment samples yielded
unaltered clay and phytolith assemblages that do not show
signiﬁcant differences from the underlying sediment samples.

6) Overall, the taxonomic nature of the faunal remains from black
layers resembles that from their adjacent and underlying
sediment.
7) Technologically and quantitatively, lithic objects from black
layers resemble those from their adjacent and underlying
sediment, are commonly thermally altered to temperatures
below 450  C and occasionally show in situ breakage. In contrast,
the ash layers yielded signiﬁcantly less, smaller and technologically distinct objects (shatter debris heated to >500  C).
Hence, it is possible that the archaeological black layers represent
portions of the Neanderthal occupation substrate charred as an effect
of ﬁres made on them. Similar features identiﬁed in a Mesolithic
combustion feature from Balma de l’Abeurador (Hérault, France)
were interpreted as litière incendié, or burned soil litter (Wattez,
1990). At El Salt, prevalence of plant residues in the ﬁrst stages of
disintegration, organic ﬁne substance representing more advanced

2530

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Fig. 13. a, b) Microphotographs showing calcitic ash from H-32. Images in XPL. cef) Ash from H-44: Aligned Calcium oxalate crystals (c), Incompletely combusted Celtis sp. seed
coats (d) and unidentiﬁed plant tissue exhibiting moss-like morphology (e, f). aed in XPL and eef in PPL.

decay and the presence of spores and fungal hyphae, suggest that the
surfaces occupied by the Neanderthals from the studied S.U. X facies
were covered by plant residues in early stages of degradation.
Supporting evidence comes from organic chemistry analyses of
El Salt combustion features (Sistiaga et al., in preparation-a, in
preparation-b). First, spectra from the black layers and adjacent
sediment show similar n-alkanes distribution patterns with an odd
over even predominance ranging between C21 and C37 (maximum
at C29) (Fig. 18). The high proportion of n-C29 alkanes appears to
derive from leaves or non-woody biomass (Van Bergen et al., 1997),
whereas n-C31 alkanes represent grasses or mosses (Maffei, 1996;
Van Bergen et al., 1997; Sistiaga et al., in preparation-a). Interestingly, this pattern was particularly clear at the top of the H-32 black
layer, which showed an olive brown colour in the ﬁeld. Experimental ﬁre NFT-14, which was made on a surface covered with
grass and moss, also yielded an olive brown layer below the ash.
The presence of grass phytoliths (both in NFT-14 and in H-32) is in
agreement with this hypothesis, which needs further experimental

testing. Second, the H-30, H-32 and H-33 black layers show presence of C28 sterols (Sistiaga et al., in preparation-b), possibly
related to fungal activity or microbial biomass associated with plant
litter, in agreement with our micromorphological observations.
Fibrous spongy coprolites identiﬁed microscopically within the
black layers are comparable to those reported in Holocene stabling
contexts (e.g., Macphail et al., 1998; Macphail and Goldberg, 2010;
Matthews et al., 1996), suggesting they might derive from herbivores. This points to penecontemporaneous herbivore activity and
plant litter formation; a process that was suddenly interrupted by
anthropogenic burning. Turning again to organic chemistry data,
this is in agreement with high proportions of 5b-stigmastanol (see
Fig.18) e a biomarker of faecal herbivore contribution to the soil lipid
fraction, identiﬁed in the H-32 black layer (Sistiaga et al., in
preparation-b).
The spatial distribution of the associated lithic and faunal
record together with the evidence mentioned above points to
the possibility of site abandonment during the formation of the

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2531

Fig. 14. a) Field view of H-32. Note the succession of a black, dark olive brown and white layer. b) Microscopic view of the H-32 stratiﬁed sequence. The white layer is composed of
calcitic wood ash and the dark olive brown and black layers have an organo-mineral composition. Image in plane polarized light. The olive brown layer is microaggregated and
contains calcined teeth and bone fragments (c, d) and phosphate-rich coprolite fragments with unidentiﬁed inclusions (e, f). All images in PPL except f (XPL). (For interpretation of
the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

black layer. First, although O. cuniculus bone fragments are
frequent in white and black layers, as well as in their adjacent
sediment, the fragments within white layers are not calcined.
Likewise, the H-30 and H-32 ash layers yielded unburnt medium
size mammal bone fragments. This evidence suggests natural
(non-anthropogenic) accumulation of animal bone on abandoned combustion features. In our experiments, ﬂint and bone
tossed in the ﬁre were consistently thermally altered. Thus, it is
possible that the unburnt archaeological items reﬂect postdepositional redistribution of remains belonging to an overlying
deposit. Overall, black layers did not yield calcined bone fragments except for H43 and H45. Strongly thermally altered lithic
objects from these black layers are small-sized. This suggests
possible trampling or reworking. Accordingly, trampling is suggested by the micromorphological features evidenced in H-43,
and H-45 is strongly bioturbated.

Second, while the ash layers contain predominantly small ﬁreshattered debris, which is in agreement with our experimental
data, lithic remains from the black and adjacent layers, which are
larger objects (ﬂakes, cores, retouched pieces, etc., representing
different events of tool production and use) are usually concentrated
towards the top and base of black layers, with less items in between.
This evidence points to the possible existence of two different
occupation surfaces separated by a plant litter accumulation.
Organic chemistry data support this hypothesis. Spectra from the
top and base of the H-32 black layer (Fig. 18) show an elevated
proportion of coprostanol (Sistiaga et al., in preparation-b). This
sterol has been effectively used as a proxy indicator for human faecal
deposition (Bull et al., 1999, 2002; Leeming et al., 1996; Birk et al.,
2011) and is a good marker of human occupation. The phosphate
rich, complex coprolite fragments micromorphologically identiﬁed
at the top of the H-32 black layer could represent human excrements.

2532

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Fig. 15. a) Field view of H-44 during excavation. A transect left in situ for sampling displays a succession of ash and reddish sediment overlying the black layer. b) Detail of the H44
sequence. Note the overlying H-32 feature (including its substrate). c) Microphotograph of the microaggregated reddish sediment containing thermally altered tufa grains. d) Detail
of reddened microaggregates. Both images in PPL. e) H-44 thin section scan showing a thin black/white couplet on top of the main combustion sequence. Scale bar is 1 cm. f) Detail
of calcitic ash in the middle lamina; g) Detail of charred OM in the basal lamina. All images in PPL. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

Further micromorphological investigation and spatial distribution
analyses focussing on reﬁts and grouping of lithic raw material units
are needed to test the hypothesis of site abandonment during the
formation of the black layer.

4.2. Broader implications
Our results offer a cautionary note on the excavation methods
applied to ﬂat archaeological combustion structures. According to

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

2533

Fig. 16. Microphotographs showing identical lithological composition between black layers and underlying sediment (a in PPL and b in XPL) and presence of ﬁbrous spongy
phosphatic grains in the latter sediment (c, d).

our study, the combustion event could be represented solely by the
archaeological material and sediment contained within the top
white or grey (ash) layer, and everything underneath could belong
to human activity predating the combustion event. Hence, unless

they are charcoal-rich e a condition that can be tested microscopically in the ﬁeld, black and rubeﬁed/browned layers should
be excavated in conjunction with their adjacent sediment and
the archaeological material contained in these layers should be

Fig. 17. Figure showing the anatomical origin of the identiﬁed phytoliths. When possible, results of samples from the same combustion feature or layer have been averaged.

2534
C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537
Fig. 18. Organic chemistry analysis performed on sediment samples from the H-32 combustion feature. Histograms on the left show the relative abundance of n-alkanes in each layer of the combustion structure. H32 WL and H32 BL
show heat-induced reduction of long-chain n-alkanes while the odd over even predominance of long chain alkanes in H-32 AS and specially H-32 GL points to the presence of incompletely combusted grasses or mosses. Partial GC/MS
chromatograms on the right are from different H-32 layers. Sterols present in H32 GL and US are indicative of human faecal deposition whereas the BL predominant sterol represents ruminant faecal material and plant residues.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

analysed as part of the assemblages that surround the combustion
feature. Our experiments yielded particular physical indicators of
combustion over a substrate with buried remains, such as in situ
ﬂint breakage. These may also guide the excavator to establish the
nature of the black layer in the ﬁeld.
On the other hand, although our experimental and archaeological samples did not yield any example of black layers composed
mainly of charcoal fragments, several such cases have been reported in Palaeolithic contexts from different time periods that
have been investigated through micromorphology (e.g., for the
Middle Palaeolithic: Sibudu e microfacies Type 3, Goldberg et al.,
2009). In such cases, calcitic ash has been reported in association
with the charcoal, pointing to the possible existence of a former
(postdepositionally lost) thicker charcoal-rich ash layer comparable
to our experimental examples. Alternatively, such charcoal-rich
massive layers could be explained by speciﬁc pyrotechnological
traditions. For instance, an early Neolithic (Cardial) case from
Grotte d’Unang (Vaucluse, France e Structure O.A.B.-1.2.3-8) and an
Azilian case from l’Abri de La Fru (Haute-Savoie, France e Couche 3)
which yielded massive charcoal black layers were interpreted as
smothered ﬁres based on supporting experimental data (Wattez,
1990). Finding additional microstratigraphic markers of speciﬁc
pyrotechnological Middle Palaeolithic traditions will help explain
the evidence found in sites like Sibudu.
From an archaeostratigraphic point of view, our data underlines
the importance of a correct reading of anthropogenic combustion
residues before attempting to interpret settlement dynamics. There
have been numerous spatial distribution studies based on data
derived from archaeological combustion features, e.g., Abric
Romaní (Vallverdú-Poch et al., 2005), El Salt (Marrero et al., 2011),
Abric del Pastor (Machado et al., submitted for publication, Marrero
et al., 2011), Bolomor (Sañudo and Fernández, 2007), Tor-Faraj
(Henry, 2012), Kebara (Meignen et al., 2007), Roca dels Bous
(Martínez-Moreno et al., 2004) and Roc de Marsal (Aldeias et al.,
2012). All of these have provided information on particular ways
in which Neandertal groups organized their activities in space and
most of them are assimilated with the ethnographic patterns
documented by Binford in the late 1970s and early 80s in what is
referred to as the “Hearth-Assemblage Model” (Binford, 1978,
1983). Such studies would beneﬁt from high resolution characterization of the corresponding black layers as to whether they
represent fuel or charred residues of a pre-combustion occupation
surface. Then, stratigraphically accurate associations between lithic
and bone remains inside and outside the combustion features could
be established.
5. Conclusions
The results presented here provide an explanation about the
nature of the black layer of ﬂat combustion structures, leading us
to argue against the categorical interpretation of archaeological
black layers as fuel residue. We have provided experimental data
that shows cases in which combustion activity residues are
associated only with the ash layer of the combustion structure,
while everything underneath (including material contained in the
black layer) is associated with activity preceding the ﬁre. This
distinction is relevant towards identiﬁcation and interpretation of
human living surfaces in archaeological palimpsests. Thus the
results have signiﬁcant implications towards excavation methods
and interpretation of archaeological combustion features. Further
research into the nature of El Salt S.U. X burned substrates will
provide information about the kinds of surfaces on which the
Neandertals from this site lived, and correlations between these
surfaces and the lithic and faunal assemblages will aid us in the
reconstruction of their daily activities. Finally, the results from this

2535

study are case in point to the importance of studying archaeological contexts integrating different datasets at a micrographic
scale in order to characterize complex anthropogenic deposits
correctly.
Acknowledgements
We thank The Leakey Foundation for full sponsorship of the
Neandertal Fire Technology Project, which allowed the work and
discoveries presented here. We are also thankful for the support of
ASPR (Peabody Museum, Harvard University) and to the members
of the research team “Sociedades cazadoras-recolectoras paleolíticas” based at Universidad de La Laguna for their support and
help with ﬁeld and laboratory tasks. Archaeological research at El
Salt is funded by Spanish IþD Project HAR2008-06117/HIST, and the
Cultural Heritage Department of the Valencia Government, under
the direction of Professor Bertila Galván of Universidad de La
Laguna. Micromorphological, phytolith and mineralogical research
was funded by Juan de La Cierva postdoctoral grants to C. Mallol
and D. Cabanes.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2012.09.017.
References
Albert, R., Cabanes, D., 2007. Fire in prehistory: an experimental approach to
combustion processes and phytolith remains. Isr. J. Earth Sci. 56 (2e4), 175e189.
Albert, R.M., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., Weiner, S., 2000. Phytoliths in the Middle
Paleolithic deposits of Kebara cave, Mt. Carmel, Israel: study of the plant
materials used for fuel and other purposes. J. Archaeol. Sci. 27 (10), 931e947.
Albert, R.M., Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L., Weiner, S., 2003. Quantitative phytolith
study of hearths from the Natuﬁan and Middle Palaeolithic levels of Hayonim
Cave (Galilee, Israel). J. Archaeol. Sci. 30 (4), 461e480.
Albert, R.M., Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2012. Insights on Neanderthal Fire Use at
KebaraCave (Israel) through high Resolution Study of Prehistoric Combustion
Features: evidence from phytoliths and thin sections. Quat. Int. 247, 278e293.
Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., 2001. Study of phytoliths in prehistoric ash layers using
a quantitative approach. In: Meunier, J.D., Coline, F. (Eds.), Phytoliths, Applications in Earth Sciences and Human History. A.A. Balkema Publishers, Amsterdam, pp. 251e266.
Aldeias, V., Goldberg, P., Sandgathe, D., Berna, F., Dibble, H., McPherron, S.P., Turq, A.,
Rezek, Z., 2012. Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc de Marsal (France).
J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 2414e2423.
Asmussen, B., 2009. Intentional or incidental thermal modiﬁcation? Analysing site
occupation via buried bone. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 528e536.
Babel, U., 1975. Micromorphology in soil organic matter. In: Gieseking, J.E. (Ed.), Soil
Components. Organic Components, vol. 1. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York, pp. 369e473.
Bailey, G.N., 2007. Time perspectives, palimpsests and the archaeology of time.
J. Anthropol. Archeol. 26, 198e223.
Berna, F., Goldberg, P., 2008. Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and associated
hominin behavior in Israel. Isr. J. Earth Sci. 56, 107e121.
Berna, F., Behar, A., Shahack-Gross, R., Berg, J., Boaretto, E., Gilboa, A., Sharon, I.,
Shalev, S., Shilshtein, S., Yahalom-Mack, N., Zorn, J.R., Weiner, S., 2007. Sediments exposed to high temperatures: reconstructing pyrotechnological
processes in Late Bronze and Iron Age Strata at Tel Dor (Israel). J. Archaeol. Sci.
34, 358e373.
Binford, L.R., 1978. Dimensional analysis of behavior and site structure: learning
from an Eskimo hunting stand. Am. Antiq. 43 (3), 330e361.
Binford, L.R., 1983. In Pursuit of the Past. Decoding the Archaeological Record.
Thames & Hudson, New York.
Birk, J.J., Teixeira, W.E., Neves, E.G., Glaser, B., 2011. Faeces déposition on Amazonian
Anthrosols as assesed from 5b-stanols. J. Archaeol. Sci. 38, 1209e1220.
Bull, I.D., Simpson, I.A., van Bergen, P.F., Evershed, R.P., 1999. Muck ‘n’ molecules:
organic geochemical methods for detecting ancient manuring. Antiquity 73,
86e96.
Bull, I.D., Lockheart, M.J., Elhmmali, M.M., Roberts, D.J., Evershed, R.P., 2002. The
origin of faeces by means of biomarker detection. Environ. Int. 27, 647e654.
Cabanes, D., Mallol, C., Expósito, I., Baena, J., 2010. Phytolith evidence for hearths
and beds in the Late Mousterian occupations of Esquilleu Cave (Cantabria,
Spain). J. Archaeol. Sci. 37 (11), 2947e2957.
Canti, M.G., 2003. Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant
ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena 54 (3), 339e361.

2536

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537

Chandler, C., Cheney, Ph., Thomas, Ph., Trabaud, L., Williams, D., 1983. Fire in
Forestry: Forest Fire Behavior and Effects, vol. I. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Clemente, I., 1997. Thermal alteration of Flint implements and the conservation of
microwear polish: preliminary experimental observations. In: Ramón Millán, A.,
Bustillo, M.A. (Eds.), Siliceous Rocks and Culture. Monografía Arte y Arqueología, vol. 42. Universidad de Granada, Granada, pp. 525e535.
Costamagno, S., Griggo, C., Mourre, V., 1999. Approche Experimentale d’un problème taphonomique. Utilisation de combustible osseaux au Paleolithique. Préhistorie Européene 13, 167e194.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Brugal, J.P., Guibert, R., 2005. Taphonomic consequences of the use of bones as fuel: experimental data and archaeological
applications. In: O’Connor, T. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 9th ICAZ conference,
Durham 2002. Biosphere to Lithosphere. New Studies in Vertebrate
Taphonomy. Oxbow Books, Oxford, pp. 52e64.
Costamagno, S., Théry-Parisot, I., Kuntz, D., Bon, F., Mensan, A., 2010. Taphonomic impact of prolonged combustion on bones used as fuel. Palethnologie
2, 97e109.
Courty, M.A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R.I., 1989. Soils and Micromorphology in
Archaeology. In: Cambridge Manuals in Archaeology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Courty, M.A., Carbonell, E., Vallverdú-Poch, J., Banerjee, R., 2012. Microstratigraphic
and multi-analytical evidence for advanced Neanderthal pyrotechnology at
Abric Romani (Capellades, Spain). Quat. Int. 247, 294e312.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., 1992. Effect of heat treatment on siliceous rocks used in
prehistoric lithic technology. J. Archaeol. Sci. 19, 601e614.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., 2007. A Review of heat treatment research. Lithic Technol.
32, 153e194.
Domanski, M., Webb, J.A., Glaisher, R., Gurba, J., Libera, J., Zakóscielna, A., 2009. Heat
treatment of Polish ﬂint. J. Archaeol. Sci. 36, 1400e1408.
Dorta, R.J., Hernández, C.M., Molina, F.J., Galván, B., 2010. La alteración térmica en
los sílex de los valles alcoyanos (Alicante, España). Una aproximación desde la
arqueología experimental en contextos del Paleolítico Medio: El Salt. Recerques
del Museu d’Alcoi 19, 33e64.
Ellis, G.P., 1959. The Maillard reaction. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. 14, 63e134.
Galanidou, N., 1997. Home is Where the Hearth is. The Spatial Organisation of the
Upper Palaeolithic Rockshelter Occupations at Klithi and Kastritsa In Northwest
Greece. In: BAR International Series 687. Oxford.
Galván, B., Hernández, C.M., Mercier, N., Mallol, C. The last Neandertals of Mediterranean Iberia. New Chronological Framework for the Site of El Salt (Alcoy,
Spain), submitted for publication.
Galván, B., Francisco, Ma.I., Hernández, C.M., Bischoff, J.L., Fumanal, Ma.P.,
Estrella, M.J., 1991. El yacimiento de El Salt (Alcoy, Alicante). In: VIII Reunión
sobre Cuaternario: Medios sedimentarios, cambios ambientales y hábitat
humano. Resúmenes y sesiones. Universidad de Valencia, Valencia.
Galván, B., Hernández, C.M., Francisco, Ma.I., 2006a. Territorio y producción lítica en
los valles de Alcoy (Alicante) durante el Paleolítico Medio. Aproximación al
modo de vida de los neandertales en la montaña Alicantina. In: Martínez, G.,
Morgado, A., Rodríguez, A., Alfonso, J.A. (Eds.), Sociedades Prehistóricas,
Recursos abióticos y Territorio. Actas de la IIIa Reunión de trabajo sobre aprovisionamiento de recursos abióticos en la Prehistoria. Universidad de Granada,
Loja, Granada, pp. 135e158.
Galván, B., Hernández, C.M., Francisco, Ma.I., Rodríguez, A., 2006b. Datos para la
caracterización del Final del Musteriense en los valles de Alcoi. In: Cabrera,
Bernaldo de Quirós, F., Maillo, J.F. (Eds.), En el Centenario de la Cueva del Castillo: el ocaso de los Neandertales. UNED, Cantabria, pp. 129e141.
Giovannini, G., Lucchesi, S., 1997. Modiﬁcations induced in soil physico-chemical
parameters by experimental ﬁres at different intensities. Soil Sci. 162, 479e486.
Goldberg, P., Macphail, R.I., 2006. Practical and Theoretical Geoarchaeology. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Goldberg, P., Miller, C.E., Schiegl, S., Ligouis, B., Berna, F., Conard, N.J., Wadley, L.,
2009. Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance in the Middle Stone Age of
Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Arch. Anth. Sci. 1 (2), 95e122.
Goldberg, P., Dibble, H.L., Berna, F., Sandgathe, D., McPherron, S.P., Turq, A., 2012.
New Evidence on Neandertal use of Fire: examples from Roc de Marsal and
Pech de l’Azé IV. Quat. Int. 247, 325e340.
Gómez, D., Mallol, C., Galván, B., Hernández, C.M., 2010. Una visión geoarqueológica
del yacimiento musteriense de El Salt (Alcoy, Alicante) a partir de la micromorfología de suelos. Recerques del Museu d’Alcoi 19, 19e32.
González-Pérez, J.A., González-Vila, F.J., Almendros, G., Knicker, H., 2004. The effect
of ﬁre on soil organic matterda review. Environ. Int. 30, 855e870.
Hayden, B., 2012. Neandertal social structure? Oxford J. Arch. 31 (1), 1e26.
Henry, D.O., 2012. The palimpsest problem, hearth pattern analysis, and Middle
Paleolithic site structure. Quat. Int. 247, 246e266.
Karkanas, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2000. Diagenesis in prehistoric
caves: the use of minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the
archaeological record. J. Archeol. Sci. 27, 915e929.
Katz, O., Cabanes, D., Weiner, S., Maeir, A.M., Boaretto, E., Shahack-Gross, R., 2010.
Rapid phytolith extraction for analysis of phytolith concentrations and assemblages during an excavation: an application at Tell es-Saﬁ/Gath, Israel.
J. Archaeol. Sci. 37, 1557e1563.
Leeming, R., Ball, A., Ashbolt, N., Nichols, P., 1996. Using faecal sterols from humans
and animals to distinguish faecal pollution in receiving waters. Water Res. 30,
2893e2900.
Leroi-Gourhan, 1973. Séminaire sur les structures d’habitat: témoins de combustion. Collège de France, Paris.

Lyman, R.L., 1994. Vertebrate Taphonomy. In: Cambridge Manuals in Archaeology.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Machado, J., Hernández, C.M., Mallol, C., Galván, B. Lithic Production, Site
Formation and Middle Palaeolithic Palimpsest Analysis. In: Search of Human
Occupation Episodes at Abric del Pastor Stratigraphic Unit IV (Alicante,
Spain), submitted for publication.
Machado, J., Hernández, C.M., Galván, B., 2011. Contribución teórico-metodológica
al análisis histórico de palimpsestos arqueológicos a partir de la producción
lítica. Un ejemplo de aplicación para el Paleolítico medio en el yacimiento de El
Salt (Alcoy, Alicante). Recerques del Museu d’Alcoi 20, 33e46.
Macphail, R.I., Goldberg, P., 2010. Archaeological materials. In: Stoops, G.,
Marcelino, V., Mees, F. (Eds.), Interpretation of Micromorphological Features of
Soils and Regoliths. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 589e622.
Macphail, R.I., Cruise, G.M., Mellalieu, S.J., Nibblet, R., 1998. Micromorphological
interpretation of a “turf-ﬁlled” funerary shaft at St. Albans, United Kingdom.
Geoarchaeology 13, 617e644.
Madella, M., Alexandre, A., Ball, T., 2005. International code for phytolith nomenclature 1.0. Ann. Bot. 96, 253e260.
Maffei, M., 1996. Chemotaxonomic signiﬁcance of leaf wax alkanes in the Gramineae. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 24, 53e64.
Mallol, C., Marlowe, F., Porter, C., Wood, B., Bar-Yosef, O., 2007. Earth, wind and
ﬁre: ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. J. Archaeol. Sci. 34 (12),
2035e2052.
Mallol, C., Hernández, C., Cabanes, D., Machado, J., Sistiaga, A., Pérez, L., Dorta, R.,
Gómez, D., Galván, B. Experimental Data on Flat Combustion Structures.
Proceedings of the 14th International Working Meeting on Soil Micromorphology. Lleida 8e14 July 2012, submitted for publication.
March, R., Dorta, R., Sistiaga, A., Galván, B., Hernández, C.M., 2008. Tras el fuego de
los neandertales. Actas del VII Congreso Ibérico de Arqueometría. In: Química
Orgánica aplicada a las estructuras combustión del yacimiento musteriense de
El Salt (Alcoy, Alicante). Departamento de Prehistoria del Instituto de Historia,
CSIC & Museo Arqueológico Nacional, Madrid, pp. 28e41.
Marrero, E., Hernández, C.M., Galván, B., 2011. El análisis espacial en el estudio de
las secuencias de facies arqueosedimentarias. Criterios para identiﬁcar eventos
de ocupación en yacimientos del Paleolítico Medio: El Salt y el Abric del Pastor
(Alcoy, Alicante, España). Recerques del Museu d’Alcoi 20, 7e32.
Martínez-Moreno, J., Mora, R., de la Torre, I., 2004. Methodological approach for
understanding middle Palaeolithic settlement dynamics at La Roca dels Bous
(Noguera, Catalunya, Northeast Spain). In: Conard, N.J. (Ed.), Settlement
Dynamics of the Middle Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age, vol. 2. Kerns Verlag,
Tübingen, pp. 393e414.
Mataix-Solera, J., Cerdà, A., Arcenegui, V., Jordán, A., Zavala, L.M., 2011. Fire effects
on soil aggregation: a review. Earth Sci. Rev. 109 (1e2), 44e60.
Matthews, W., French, C.A.I., Lawrence, T., Cutler, D.F., Jones, M.K., 1996. Microstratigraphic traces of site formation processes and human acitvities. World
Archaeol. 29, 281e308.
Meignen, L., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2007. The hearths at Kebara Cave and their
role in site formation processes. In: Bar-Yosef, O., Meignen, L. (Eds.), Kebara
Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel: the Middle and Upper Paleolithic Archaeology, Part I,
pp. 91e122.
Mercieca, A., Hiscock, P., 2008. Experimental insights into alternative strategies of
lithic heat treatment. J. Archaeol. Sci. 38, 2634e2639.
Miller, C.E., Conard, N.J., Goldberg, P., Berna, F., 2010. Dumping, sweeping and
trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically
modiﬁed combustion features. Palethnologie 2, 25e37.
Mulholland, S.C., George Rapp, J., 1992. Phytolith Systematics: an introduction. In:
George Rapp, J., Mulholland, S.C. (Eds.), Phytolith Systematics. Emerging Issues.
Plenum Press, New York, London, pp. 1e13.
Piperno, D.R., 1988. Phytolith Analysis: an Archeological and Geological Perspective.
Academic Press, San Diego.
Piperno, D.R., 2006. Phytoliths: a Comprehensive Guide for Archaeologists and
Paleoecologists. AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD.
Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of ﬁre in
Europe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 5209e5214.
Sanchis, A., 2000. Los restos de Oryctolagus cuniculus en las tafocenosis de Bubo
bubo y Vulpes vulpes y su aplicación a la caracterización de registro faunístico
arqueológico. Saguntum PLAV 32, 31e50.
Sanchis, A., 2012. Los lagomorfos del Paleolítico medio en la vertiente mediterránea
ibérica. Serie de Trabajos Varios: 115. In: Humanos y otros predadores como
agentes de aporte y alteración de los restos óseos en yacimientos arqueológicos.
Diputación de Valencia: Servicio de Investigación Prehistórica.
Sañudo, P., Fernández, J., 2007. Análisis espacial del nivel IV de la Cova del Bolomor
(La Valldigna, Valencia). Saguntum 39, 9e26.
Shahack-Gross, R., Berna, F., Karkanas, P., Weiner, S., 2004. Bat guano and preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites. J. Archeol. Sci. 31, 1259e1272.
Sistiaga, A., 2010. Química orgánica aplicada al estudio de las estructuras de
combustión del Paleolítico Medio de El Salt (Alicante, España). DEA thesis,
Universidad de La Laguna, Facultad de Geografía e Historia, Departamento de
Prehistoria, Historia Antigua y Antropología.
Sistiaga, A., March, R., Hernández, C.M., Galván, B., 2011. Aproximación desde la
química orgánica al estudio de los hogares del yacimiento del Paleolítico medio
de El Salt (Alicante, España). Recerques del Museu d’Alcoi 20, 47e70.
Sistiaga, A., March, R., Mallol, C., Hernández, C.M., Galván, B. Biomolecular evidence
from Neanderthal ﬁreplaces. A study of Stratigraphic Unit X from the Middle
Paleolithic site of El Salt (Alcoy, Spain), in preparation-a.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (2013) 2515e2537
Sistiaga, A., March, R., Mallol, C., Hernández, C.M., Galván, B. The application of
steroidal biomarkers to assess ancient faecal input: the Neanderthal site of El
Salt (Alcoy, Spain), in preparation-b.
Stevenson, M.G., 1991. Beyond the formation of hearth-associated artifact assemblages. In: Kroll, E.M., Price, T.D. (Eds.), The Interpretation of Archaeological
Spatial Patterning. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 269e299.
Terefe, T., Mariscal-Sancho, I., Peregrina, F., Espejo, R., 2008. Inﬂuence of heating on
various properties of six Mediterranean soils. A laboratory study. Geoderma
143, 273e280.
Théry-Parisot, I., 1998. Economie du combustible et paéocologique en context
glaciaire et périglaciaire, Paléolithique Moyen et Supérieur du Sud de la France
(Anthracologie, expérimentation, taphonomie). Université de Paris I, Panthéon
Sorbonne.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2001. Économie des combustibles au Paléolithique. Paris. In:
Dossier de Documentation Archéologique, vol. 20. CNRS.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2002. Fuel Management (Bone and Wood) during the Lower
Aurignacian in the Pataud Rock Shelter (Lower Paleolithic, Les Eyzies de Tayac,
Dordogne, France). J. Archaeol. Sci. 29, 1415e1421.
Théry-Parisot, I., Meignen, L., 2000. Economie des combustibles dans l’abri moustérien des Canalettes, de l’expérimentation á la simulation des besoins énergétques. Gallia Préhistoire 32, 45e55.
Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Ntinou, M., Bouby, L., Carré, A., 2010. From wood to
charcoal: an experimental approach to combustion. Palethnologie 2, 79e81.
Théry-Parisot, I., Gril, J., Vernet, J.L., Meignen, L., Maury, J., 1996. Coal used for fuel at
two prehistoric sites in Southern France: Les Canalettes (Mousterian) and Les
Usclades (Mesolithic). J. Archaeol. Sci. 23 (4), 509e512.
Twiss, P.C., Suess, E., Smith, R.M., 1969. Morphological classiﬁcation of grass phytoliths. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 33, 109e115.
Ulery, A.L., Graham, R.C., 1993. Forest ﬁre effects on soil color and texture. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. J. 57, 135e140.
Van Bergen, P.F., Bull, I.D., Poulton, P.R., Evershed, R.P.,1997. Organic geochemical studies
of soils from the Rothamsted classical experiments. Org. Geochem. 26, 117e135.

2537

Vallverdú-Poch, J., Courty, M.A., 2012. Microstratigraphic analysis of level j deposits:
a dual PaleoenvironmentalePaleoethnographic contribution to Paleolithic
Archeology at the Abric Romaní (Chapter 4). In: Carbonell i Roura, E. (Ed.), High
Resolution Archaeology and Neanderthal Behavior: Time and Space in Level J of
Abric Romaní (Capellades, Spain), Vertebrate Paleobiology and Paleoanthropology. Springer, pp. 77e133.
Vallverdú-Poch, J., Allué, A., Bischoff, J.L., Cáceres, I., Carbonell, E., Cebrià, A., GarcíaAntón, D., Huguet, R., Ibáñez, N., Martínez, K., Pastó, I., Rosell, J., Saladié, P.,
Vaquero, M., 2005. Short human occupations in the Middle Palaeolithic level i
of the Abric Romaní rock-shelter. J. Hum. Evol. 48, 157e174.
Vallverdú-Poch, J., Alonso, S., Bargalló, B., Bartrolí, R., Campeny, G., Carrancho, A.,
Expósito, I., Fontanals, M., Gabucio, J., Gómez, B., Prats, J.M., Sañudo, P., Solé, A.,
Vilalta, J., Carbonell, E., 2012. Combustion structures of archaeological level O
and mousterian activity areas at the Abric Romaní rockshelter (NE Iberian
Peninsula). Quat. Int. 247, 313e324.
Vaquero, M., Pastó, I., 2001. The deﬁnition of spatial units in Middle Palaeolithic
sites: the hearth-related assemblages. J. Archaeol. Sci. 28 (11), 1209e1220.
Wadley, L., 2010. Cemented ash as a receptacle or work surface for ochre powder
production at Sibudu, South Africa, 58,000 years ago. J. Archaeol. Sci. 37, 2397e
2406.
Wattez, J., 1990. Dynamique de Formation des Structures de Combustion de la Fin
du Paléolithique au Néolitique Moyen. Approche Méthodologique et Implications Culturelles. Ph.D. dissertation, Université de Paris I.
Yellen, J., 1977. Archaeological Approaches to the Present e Models for Reconstructing the Past. Academic Press, New York.
Yravedra, J., 2006a. Implicaciones tafonómicas del consumo de lagomorfos por
Búho Real (Bubo Bbbo) en la interpretación de los yacimientos arqueológicos.
AnMurcia 22, 33e47.
Yravedra, J., 2006b. Tafonomía aplicada a Zooarqueología. UNED Ediciones, Madrid.
Yravedra, J., Baena, J., Arrizabalaga, A., Iriarte, M.J., 2005. El empleo del material óseo
como combustible durante el Paleolítico Medio y Superior en el Cantábrico.
Observaciones experimentales. Museo de Altamira, Monografías 20, 369e383.

