Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jaa

The ethnoarchaeology of ﬁrewood management in the Fang villages
of Equatorial Guinea, central Africa: Implications for the interpretation
of wood fuel remains from archaeological sites
Llorenç Picornell Gelabert a,⇑, Eleni Asouti b, Ethel Allué Martí c
a
b
c

Seminari d’Estudis i Recerca Prehistòrica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
School of Archaeology, Classics and Egyptology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i Evolució Social, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 October 2010
Revision received 15 May 2011
Available online 14 June 2011
Keywords:
Ethnoarchaeology
Charcoal analisys/anthracology
Landscape management
Paleoethnobotany
Firewood management
Fang
Equatorial Guinea
Central Africa

a b s t r a c t
In archaeological literature, the study of trees and wood remains is a topic of relatively marginal interest,
especially compared to texts on crops and human–animal relations. However, charcoal is the most frequent botanical remain found in archaeological sites. Charcoal analysis can therefore play a major role
in the development of studies in both landscape and palaeoethnobotanical reconstruction. The majority
of the archaeological charcoal assemblages reﬂect the exploitation of wood as an energy source (fuel). The
archaeological study of ﬁrewood selection has been predominantly developed from ‘‘eco-utilitarian’’ or
‘‘subsistence economy’’ perspectives, but has not yet considered fuel collection and use as one of the most
enduring categories of human–environment interactions, nor has archaeology looked into its potential as
a source of empirical information on past perceptions of, and interactions with, ancient landscapes. The
aim of this paper is to expand previous archaeological work on the interpretation of charcoal macroremains through the study of ﬁrewood collection as a historically constituted, socially mediated and
archaeologically observable landscape practice. In order to achieve this, we present an ethnoarchaeological case study from the Fang society of Equatorial Guinea (central Africa) aimed at gaining a better
understanding of the complex interactions between cultural, ecological and economic variables in ﬁrewood collection strategies.
Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction: trees and ﬁrewood in archaeology
Following a long history of relevant research within anthropology, the archaeological study of trees and wood through their
material remains retrieved from excavated sites remains a topic
of relatively marginal theoretical interest. Compared to the diversity and thematic range of the literature dealing with animals
and crops (cf. Ingold, 1988; O’Day et al., 2004; Palmer and Van
der Veen, 2002) trees have received limited attention (Rival,
1998, p. 1). Waterlogged or charred remains of unworked wood
have been extensively deployed in reconstructing ancient environments and human impact on the landscape (see edited volumes of
the proceedings of the International Meeting of Anthracology:
Damblon and Court-Picon, 2008; Fiorentino and Magri, 2008;
Thiébault, 2002; Vernet, 1992). Trees and wood are, however,
notably absent from broader debates on how the interactions of
past societies with their environments were socially mediated.
By contrast, issues of agricultural geographies, food procurement
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tokelau24@gmail.com (L. Picornell Gelabert).
0278-4165/$ - see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jaa.2011.05.002

and processing, and culinary traditions predominate the relevant
literature being both intensively theorized and methodologically
explored topics (e.g., Bogaard, 2005; Boyd, 2002; Fairbairn, 2005;
Van der Veen, 2005).
Archaeological wood macrofossil analysis, including the remains of waterlogged and carbonized wood, has a relatively short
history in the ﬁeld of archaeobotanical studies (see overview in
Asouti and Austin, 2005). This paper focuses on a speciﬁc category
of unworked wood remains, charcoal macrofossils originating in
stratiﬁed archaeological deposits that represent the residues of
domestic fuel consumption. The reason for this targeted focus is
that domestic ﬁrewood remains represent the residues of purposeful human action (i.e., the intentional burning of wood as fuel)
(Western, 1971). This critical property often cannot be ascertained
for waterlogged plant macrofossils (i.e., unworked wood and other
plant parts). Furthermore, ﬁrewood has been the principal source
of energy for pre-modern societies worldwide, with a history of
exploitation stretching as far back as the Lower Palaeolithic. In this
sense, ﬁrewood collection constitutes one of the most enduring
categories of routine landscape practices on par with food procurement and dwelling (Heizer, 1963). Therefore, its archaeological

376

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

study holds distinct potential for exploring in empirically informed
ways ancient perceptions of, and interactions with, past
landscapes.

Current epistemological contexts: charcoal analysis
(anthracology)
Following a period of intense introspection and debate on its
analytical potential and limitations (cf. Chabal, 1997; Chabal
et al., 1999; Piqué, 1999; Smart and Hoffman, 1988; Vernet and
Thiébault, 1987) the analysis of ancient ﬁrewood macro-remains
(the principal, if not exclusive, objective of the ﬁeld of charcoal
analysis/anthracology) has recently witnessed a resurgence of
high-proﬁle publications that have established internationally its
position within archaeobotanical and palaeoecological research
(e.g., Allué et al., 2009; Asouti, 2003a; Asouti and Austin, 2005;
Asouti and Hather, 2001; Delhon et al., 2009; Emery-Barbier and
Thiébault, 2005; Figueiral and Mosbrugger, 2000; Heinz et al.,
2004; Marguerie and Hunot, 2007; Théry-Parisot et al., 2010). In
its current context, charcoal analysis has often been approached
through what can be termed the ‘‘ecological-utilitarian’’ paradigm.
This paradigm conceptualizes ﬁrewood collection primarily as resource extraction mediated by the Principle of Least Effort (PLE:
Shackleton and Prins, 1992). According to the PLE wood fuel is collected in direct proportion to the availability and ease of collection
of tree and shrub species in past vegetation. Hence anthracological
datasets can be considered, under certain sampling and analytical
provisos, as a composite reﬂection of past vegetation and its ﬂuctuations through time, whether climate- or human-induced (Chabal
et al., 1999). More recent developments have expanded the remit
of the PLE by drawing on the paradigm of ‘‘subsistence economy’’.
The principal aim has been to construct frameworks of reference
predicting group perceptions (classiﬁed by the prevailing mode
of production, i.e., hunter-gatherer, pastoralist and small-scale
farmers, rather than ecological conditions) of the availability of fuel
resources that might have inﬂuenced human interactions with
woodland vegetation (Asouti and Austin, 2005). A related aim
has been to identify the range and spatio-temporal patterning of
economic behaviors to which ﬁrewood exploitation was integrated
(e.g., lumbering, foddering, cultivation, hunting, pastoral production, etc.) (Asouti and Austin, 2005).
While we consider all these perspectives as valid and informative, in this paper we argue that both the ecological-utilitarian and
the subsistence economy paradigms can be substantially improved
by moderating their dependence on predictive models drawn from
environmental determinism and economic functionalism respectively. Our aim is to expand previous work, largely inspired by
the PLE, by focusing on the description and interpretation of ﬁrewood collection strategies as historically constituted, socially mediated and, ultimately, archaeologically observable landscape
practices. At the level of archaeological interpretation this can be
achieved through the adoption of an explicit contextual approach
which the archaeological record is, at least in theory, well-placed
to accommodate. This involves the consideration of multiple lines
of evidence other than charcoal, in order to reconstruct interactions with, perceptions of, and attitudes to past landscapes. In order to demonstrate the relevance of socio-cultural variables in
the structure and organization of ﬁrewood collection strategies,
we present a recent ethnoarchaeological case study from the Fang
villages of Equatorial Guinea (Picornell, 2008, 2009). Drawing on
this research, and intersecting it with other studies realized in different ecological and cultural contexts, we will attempt to demonstrate the validity of the following premises: (a) that ecological,
socio-cultural and economic imperatives are inextricably linked
in shaping habitual practices of ﬁrewood collection; therefore their

arbitrary separation, even when done for heuristic purposes, may
be counter-intuitive and potentially misleading too, and (b) that
it is necessary to interpret the remains of domestic ﬁrewood consumption not only as independent datasets, subject to their own
analytical requirements and limitations, but also as the material
residues of past behaviors that were integrated to the area- and
period-speciﬁc social, cultural, economic and ecological contexts
that embodied them.
The ethnoarchaeological approach
It has been proposed in a number of recent publications that
ethnoarchaeology constitutes an appropriate way to expand the
range of hypotheses currently applied to the analysis of fuel remains from prehistoric sites, in order to move beyond the classic
palaeoecological and palaeoeconomic interpretations (cf. Dufraisse
et al., 2007; Henry et al., 2009; Picornell, 2009; Zapata et al., 2003).
Ethnoarchaeological studies can provide useful insights into how
different ways of perceiving the landscape may be translated into
habitual woodland exploitation practices – e.g., through ﬁrewood
management strategies (Dufraisse et al., 2007, p. 115). Such insights can be used as starting points for proposing alternative
hypotheses for the interpretation of wood charcoal assemblages
in tandem with a detailed consideration of their archaeological
contexts (Zapata et al., 2003, p. 163).
The use of ethnographic analogy has a long and distinguished
history in archaeological interpretation (David and Kramer, 2006,
pp. 43–54). Archaeobotany and anthracology in particular are
not exceptional in this regard (cf. Stevens, 2003; Théry-Parisot
et al., 2010). However, most archaeobotanical applications have
focused on the construction of predictive models considering subsistence to represent a more ‘‘conservative’’ aspect of human lifeways subject to environmental and biological imperatives (David
and Kramer, 2006, p. 136). Broadening the ethnoarchaeological
perspective may provide opportunities to challenge the uniformitarian assumptions inherent in such models, hence avoiding the
pitfalls of unilinear and potentially ethnocentric archaeological
interpretation (David, 1992, p. 352; González Ruibal, 2003, p. 12).
A consideration of cultural ethnography may also assist in
deepening our understanding of the complex linkages between
human perceptions of landscape affordances (i.e., what landscape
resources afford for the realization of human goals; Ingold, 2000)
and ﬁrewood collection practices. Our objective in undertaking
ethnoarchaeological research has been to gain a better understanding of the complex ways in which cultural, ecological and economic
variables may interact in shaping an activity as important and as
routine as ﬁrewood collection in the life of pre-modern (in the
technological and economic sense) societies.
Ethnoarchaeological research: the Fang of Equatorial Guinea
Fieldwork was carried out by Picornell during his stay in the
Monte Alen region of Equatorial Guinea between September
2007 and July 2008. Fieldwork techniques were those commonly
used in anthropological research: participant observation and
semi-structured interviews. Contrary to established practice in
ethnobotanical ﬁeldwork (cf. Albuquerque et al., 2006) questionnaires were not used for obtaining quantitative data on the botanical species collected as fuel. In addition, Picornell followed a
strategy of open-ended interviews aimed at encouraging local participants to recount their own experiences and perceptions of daily
routines associated with fuel collection and consumption. The aim
was not to quantify fuel selection (e.g., by constructing ranking orders of preferred ﬁrewood species) but rather to explore the local
habitual practices associated with fuel exploitation. A total of 23

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

interviews were conducted in the Fang villages of Moka, Ngong and
Misergue (Fig. 1). Participation in, and observation of, the daily
tasks of Fang women from different villages and households provided the opportunity to document in detail the multitude of routine activities that were directly or indirectly associated with
ﬁrewood collection and consumption. Additionally, interviews
were conducted with three different groups of informants (Table 1)
for documenting a representative range of the local perceptions of
ﬁrewood exploitation, which could be compared to the evidence
collected through participant observation.
The study area
The Monte Alen region is located in the center of the Niefang
Mountain Range of Equatorial Guinea, in central Africa (Fig. 1). This
is an area with a low population density (2.3 p/km2) (Fa, 1991, p.
140) and is delimited by the villages of Niefang in the north-west
and Evinayong in the south-east, which are connected by road to
the city of Bata, the capital of the Continental Region of Equatorial
Guinea. Monte Alen was declared a natural reserve by the Guinean
Government in 1988, under the guidance of the European Union.
This political measure had a major impact on the Fang hunting
practices, by banning the hunting of species traditionally exploited
by these communities. Development programs brought frozen
meat to villages to make up for the hunting ban. On the other hand,
slash and burn agricultural practices were not considered to be
detrimental to nature conservation policies, due to overall low

377

population density in the protected area; thus no limitations or
changes of customary practice were imposed, according to the
individuals interviewed. In the Monte Alen area, Picornell worked
primarily in the villages of Moka, Ngong and Misergue (Fig. 1).
Moka and Ngong are located on the road which connects Niefang
with Evinayong, at the eastern border of the protected area, while
Misergue is situated in the south of the Monte Alen reserve. Moka
and Ngong have an estimated population of 100 and 350 inhabitants respectively. Both communities belong to the Esaon and
Nzomo clans. Misergue is the smallest of the three villages, with
less than 100 inhabitants, all identifying themselves with the
Anvom and Ntum clans.
The prevailing climate is hot and humid, although it is tempered
by the proximity of the Monte Alen area to the Niefang mountain
range. Annual precipitation is 3528 mm, with an average temperature of 20.5 °C (Sabater-Pi, 1981). Local vegetation consists primarily of the typical African Guineo-Congolian rainforest dominated by
trees and large shrubs such as Pterocarpus soyauxii, Teighemella
africana, Brachystegia mildbraedii, Canarium velutinum, Erythrophloeum ivorense, Uapaca guineensis, Dacryodes buettneri and Parkia bicolor (Sayer et al., 1992). Secondary vegetation is encountered in
fallow orchards (Fa, 1991, p. 31–47). During the ﬁrst year after
the abandonment of an orchard, land is colonized by tall herbs of
the genus Afromamum. Following that, pioneer shrub and small
tree species (Musanga cecropioides, Trema orientalis, Fagara macrophylla, Vernonia conferta and Alchornea cordifolia) spread. After 3–
4 years mature secondary forest develops with a dense and mostly

Fig. 1. Map of Equatorial Guinea, showing its position in the African continent.

378

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

Table 1
Table showing the three different types of semi-structured interviews addressed to
different groups of informants, in order to complement the information provided by
participant observation.
Informant

Interview goal

Number of
interviews

Individual interviews with
adult women who agreed
for Picornell to join them
in their daily activities

Understand informants’
perceptions of their daily
practices in relation to
ﬁrewood collection and
consumption
Understand male
perceptions of female labor
in relation to ﬁrewood
collection and consumption
Understand the cultural
meanings attributed to
plants and the landscape

17 (6 in Moka,
5 in Ngong, 6
in Misergue)

Group interviews with the
men of each village

Knowledgeable individuals
who were identiﬁed as
such by the rest of the
community, and could
recall and dispense
information on local
traditions, and the
meanings and
perceptions of plants and
forests and how these
changed through time

3 (1 in each
village)

3 (2 in Ngong,
1 in Misergue)

impenetrable undergrowth consisting of herbs (Halopegia azurea,
Sarcophrynium velutinum, Haumania danckelmaniana), climbing
palms (Oncocalamus mannii, Loccosperma acutiﬂorum), lianas (Cissus lamprophyla) and cryptogam epiphytes. Trees in these secondary forests comprise tall and slow growing species such as
Pycnanthus angolensis, Terminalia superba, Aucoumea klaineana,
Chlorophora excelsa and Caloncoba welwitschii. Local fauna is enormously diverse. Typical species include the western lowland gorilla
(Gorilla gorilla), chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and black colobus
monkeys (Colobus satanus) (Garcia and Mba, 1997), as well as the
forest elephant (Loxodonta africana), leopards (Panthera pardus),
buffalos (Syncerus caffer), giant pangolins (Smutsia gigantea) and
the grey necked picathartes (Picathartes oreas) (Rist, 2007, p. 16).

The Fang landscape: settlement patterns and subsistence activities
The Fang are a Bantu group inhabiting different countries in
central Africa (Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Congo
Brazzaville). They constitute the largest ethnic group in mainland
Equatorial Guinea, with other groups occupying primarily the
coastal zone and the islands. They are divided in two linguistic
groups: the Okak in the south (south of the Wolo River) and the
Ntumu in the north of the country. The villages in which ﬁeldwork
took place are all inhabited by Okak households. The sedentarization of the Fang of Equatorial Guinea was exceptionally belated and
did not start until the 1920s (Nerín, 2010). At that time the Spanish
colonial administration forced the Fang and other ethnic groups to
settle down in villages along major communication routes. Fang
villages are thus commonly located near pathways and roads,
and comprise households belonging to the same clan or two different clans. In the latter case, clans occupy different sections of the
village, which are physically separated by roads and pathways.
The Fang are organized in polygamous and exogamous clans of
patrilocal residence. Male members of a particular clan inhabit a
speciﬁc village or a section of it, and everyone possesses his own
house. Surrounding each house are different buildings used as
kitchens by the wives of the household. Upon reaching adulthood,
each woman acquires social responsibilities towards the household, which are materialized with the acquisition of an orchard
(tsií) where she will produce food, and of a ﬁreplace in a kitchen

where she will cook for the family. Kitchens are often used by several adult females (e.g., a wife, an adult unmarried daughter, a widowed sister or an unmarried niece) and for this reason may contain
several hearths (for more details on Fang villages and households
see Carrière, 2003, pp. 27–118; Picornell, 2009, pp. 138–141).
The Fang, like other slash-and-burn societies in tropical environments, maintain a topocentric organization of space (Descolà,
1988, p. 156). The village (dzaá) occupies the center of social space
(Fig. 2) from which departs a network of paths that connect the village with other areas of habitual activities, such as the orchards
(cultivation) or the rivers (ﬁshing). The forest (afán) is perceived
as a space inhabited by the spirits of plants, animals and the ancestors, which are seen as an integral part of the social life of the village. Roads, pathways, orchards (tsií) and fallow land (ekot/mbut,
see differences below) are perceived as a frontier zone between
the center of Fang social life (dzaá) and the forest (afán).
Rights of land use are divided amongst individual households.
There are no artiﬁcial physical boundaries (e.g., fences) demarcating household property. Instead, the inhabitants of each village as
well as those of neighboring villages recognize as boundaries natural elements such as individual trees, rivers or hills. Although
every household has use rights over the plots on which its orchards
are planted, no property rights over the land itself are recognized;
instead, formal ownership of the land rests with the community.
However, individual households maintain exclusive rights over
the exploitation of resources (wild fruits, trapped animals, etc.) located in orchards as well as fallow land previously cultivated by
the household, even though new orchards may not be planted
again in the same locations.
The Fang practice a diversiﬁed economy organized in seasonal
cycles (Table 2) by intervening intermittently in different ecological niches, a practice that contributes to the overall maintenance of
local biodiversity (Carrière, 2003, p. 98). With the start of the rain
season the men of each household clear the land for planting new
orchards. Orchards may be established both in the rainforest and in
the secondary forest. Not all vegetation is cleared. Some trees are
spared because they have a very hard and difﬁcult to cut wood,
they produce desirable fruits, for their shade, or due to perceived
undesirable properties. An example of the latter is ekuk (Alstonia
conguensis). Its bark has a bitter taste that the Fang believe can
be transferred to planted crops. The preservation of such trees, collectively named ntolog abok (orphan trees), assists forest regeneration when the orchards are left fallow, due to attracting forest birds
that disperse the seeds of tree and shrub species (Carrière, 2003, p.
200). This ecological process is responsible for the development of
secondary forests containing plant biodiversity hotspots (Carrière,
2003, p. 190; Descolà, 1988, p. 80). Cleared vegetation is left to dry

Fig. 2. Scheme of the Fang topocentric organization of the space, in which the
village (dzaá), the center of the social activity, is separated from the primary forest
(afán) by other social spaces (orchards, tsií, and fallow lands, ekot/mbut).

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384
Table 2
The organization of the subsistence activities undertaken by the Fang during the
annual cycle, including four seasonal cycles following the succession of the ﬁrst and
second wet/dry cycle of the year, Esep and Oyón.
Name of the
season

ESEP

379

especially medicinal plants, vegetal ﬁbers for basketry and wild
fruits. Although river ﬁshing is practiced by both men and women,
hunting by trapping is an exclusively male activity (Rist et al.,
2007).

OYÓN

NKOT
(dry season)

SUGÚ
NKOT
(rainy season) (dry season)

SUGÚ
(rainy season)

Months

December,
January,
February

March, April,
May

September,
October,
November

Climate

Dry season,
with some
occasional
rains during
the night

Rainy season Dry season
with tropical
storms in the
afternoon

Highest
amount of
precipitation,
with daily
rainfall

Subsistence
activities

– Clearance
and burning
of new
orchards
(men)
– Planting of
crops
(women)
– River
ﬁshing (men,
women and
children)

– Tending of
the orchards
(women)

– Clearance
and burning
of new
orchards
(men)
– Hunting
– Planting of
season (men) crops
(women)
– River
ﬁshing (men,
women and
children)

– Tending of
the orchards
(women)

June, July,
August

Firewood management practices
Firewood collection

– Hunting
season (men)

for a few days and it is burnt afterwards. In this way all small
branches and leaves are removed, thus facilitating the removal of
tree trunks and larger branches. The Fang believe that the ashes
produced by vegetation burning enhance soil fertility. Soil regeneration is the most critical factor for the maintenance of sustainable
orchard plantations in the long term, since new orchards are
planted every year. For this reason when an orchard becomes
unproductive the Fang will leave it fallow for at least 6–8 years,
in order to ensure proper vegetation and soil regeneration. Fallow
lands (ekot) develop secondary vegetation and with time mature
secondary forests (mbut).
Following clearance and burning, the responsibilities of the
male members of the household with regard to ﬁeld preparation
are terminated. Henceforth orchards become essentially female
spaces. The ﬁrst thing that women do is to remove all the trunks
and branches which have escaped ﬁre. They collect all the dry
wood and stack it on piles at the borders of the orchards. Then they
start planting the crops, mainly tubers like manioc (mbong) or yam
(andiáa), and bananas (ekuan) that are the Fang staple foods. Other
crops include pumpkins (nguán), peanuts (owón), sweet corn (fon)
and sugar cane (nkók). Despite being sedentary, the Fang do not
practice crop storage and maintain no crop surpluses. Women will
visit the orchards on a daily basis to weed the herbs growing
among fruit trees and to collect the crops they need on the day
or, at most, for a few days ahead. Crop production is complemented
by gathering, hunting and river ﬁshing. A variety of non-timber
products are gathered daily in the forest by women and men alike,

The ﬁrewood used by Fang households is a by-product of land
clearance and ﬁeld preparation. Women remove all trunks and
branches with diameter >5–8 cm and pile them on the ﬁeld edges.
This supply of wood is the main source of domestic ﬁrewood until
the next clearance cycle. Women collect and transport ﬁrewood
back to the village during their daily visits to the orchards to tend
the crops and/or harvest the daily food supply. Fuel, like food, is
not stored. Correspondingly there are no woodsheds in the Fang
houses. Women keep the ﬁrewood they use for cooking on the
day near their kitchen ﬁreplaces, and replenish this supply upon
their next trip to the orchards.
When there is a sporadic rise in ﬁrewood demand for special
events (e.g., funerals or traditional naming celebrations) women
collect larger quantities of wood in order to cook for the household
and its guests. This is done gradually, starting a few days before the
event during routine trips to the orchards. A staple of such feasts
are the fermented wrapped manioc sticks. They consist of tubers
that are fermented for 3 or 4 days in specially prepared spaces
on the riverbanks and are then crushed, wrapped in leaves of okieñ
(Megafrinium macrostachium) or embió (Marantocloa phillipes) and
boiled for at least 1 h, which requires large quantities of ﬁrewood
by comparison to normal daily fuel consumption. If the supply of
ﬁrewood from the orchards is not sufﬁcient to cover fuel demand
for such events, women may cut down a young tree from an ekot
plot (fallow land) belonging to their family. This is left to dry for
a few days before it is split in smaller logs and transported back
to the village. This is the only time when women may make a trip
dedicated to ﬁrewood collection. Moreover such trips are only
made to the ekot. Firewood is thus always collected from socialized
spaces (orchards, fallow land), never from the afán (Table 3). Women are also not allowed to collect ﬁrewood from the orchards
and the ekot plots managed by other households. In the event of
extraordinary fuel shortages, women must negotiate obtaining
emergency fuel supplies with the female members of other households, in exchange for some sort of compensation (food, labor, etc.)
The toolkit used for wood collection consists of axes, machetes and
baskets (nkueiñ) (Table 3). Axes are only used by men for cutting
down trees. By contrast, machetes are used by women to split
the trunks and lop the branches that are collected from the orchards following clearance and burning. The nkueiñ is a cylindrical
basket carried only by women. It is made from vegetal ﬁber from
lianas (Oncocalamus, Calamus, Ancistrophillum, Eremospatha) and
is used to transport crops, gathered plants and ﬁrewood.
Men may occasionally gather ﬁrewood for speciﬁc purposes
(Table 3). Adult men may cook game which is forbidden to women

Table 3
The organization of ﬁrewood collection, use and discard of ﬁre debris according to gender (adult men and adult women) and ﬁrewood collection catchments.
Collection area

Agent

Toolkit

Consumption space

Use

Deposition of ﬁre debris

Tsií (orchards)

Adult
women

Machete,
nkueiñ

Kitchen (female space)

Daily food preparation and other
domestic purposes

Daily deposited in the akún (speciﬁc manure
production place behind kitchens)

Ekot/Mbut Ancient
fallow orchards

Adult
women
Adult
men

Machete,
nkueiñ
Axe,
machete

Kitchen (female space)

Special food preparation for social
events (feasts)
Preparation of food forbidden for
women and children

Deposited in the akún (speciﬁc manure production
place behind kitchens)
Scattered indiscriminately away from the abá

Abá (male space for
communal gatherings)

380

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

and children, following cultural taboos that depend on clan membership, or they may prepare medicinal brews speciﬁcally destined
for men. Such cooking is done over a simple hearth set in the abá, a
rectangular ediﬁce used for hosting men’s meetings which is traditionally out of bounds for women. Firewood used for such events is
collected by men in the ekot of their family or on the borders of the
roads and paths that link the village with their hunting grounds
and the rivers. On such occasions men cut down young trees that
are left to dry by the roadside. Once dry, wood is transported back
to the village as whole trunks (i.e., without splitting) since men do
not use nkueiñ baskets which are considered the exclusive property
of women.
Firewood consumption
The bulk of the ﬁrewood collected from the orchards is used for
cooking. The structure of the kitchen hearths is simple: wood logs
and branches lay directly on the kitchen ﬂoor and cooking pots are
placed atop three stones. Women start the cooking ﬁres in the
morning of each day using two kinds of tinder: dry reeds of adzom
(Afromamum giganteum) and dry palm fruit ﬁber (alén – Elais guineensis and dzang – Raphia hookeri) produced from the crushing of
palm fruits for oil extraction. Fires remain lit for the most of the
day, since they are used for multiple purposes: cooking, boiling
the fermented manioc sticks, heating water, smoking foodstuffs,
preparation of medicinal brews, and keeping mosquitoes away
with their smoke. When women leave the kitchen to work in the
orchards or ﬁsh in the river, they pull the logs away from the ﬁreplace in order to prevent them from burning during their absence.
The hearths located in the abá are also simple structures. Each abá
has a single hearth located at the center of the ediﬁce. Besides preparing food and brews consumed by men, it is also used, albeit for
shorter periods of time compared to kitchen hearths, for heating
during men’s meetings at daybreak or during the night.
The discard of fuel debris
One of the ﬁrst tasks undertaken by women each morning is
sweeping kitchen ﬂoors. During the day the organic waste generated by food processing and other activities is left on the kitchen
ﬂoor to be removed next morning. Charcoals (mviri) and ashes
(asup) from the hearths are also removed every morning, although
they are not re-used as has been documented for other African
societies (cf. Zapata et al., 2003, pp. 171–172). Instead all fuel debris is discarded in the akun together with the rest of the organic
waste swept from the kitchen ﬂoors. The akun is a space behind
the kitchen building, fenced by banana trees, dedicated to the composting of organic waste in order to produce manure for the orchards. Fuel debris from the abá hearths is discarded randomly
behind the ediﬁces without any spatial restrictions. It is important
to note here that the volume of ﬁre debris generated in the abá
hearths is considerably smaller when compared to that of the
kitchen hearths that are almost continuously used throughout
the day.
Cultural aspects of ﬁrewood management
Wood is abundant in the local vegetation and the Fang consider
it as the best fuel. No other sources of energy were recorded to be
in use during Picornell’s ﬁeldwork. The Fang have a shared notion
of what constitutes ‘‘good fuel’’: dry logs with diameter between
5–8 cm and 15–20 cm. Firewood collected from the orchards fulﬁls
these requirements since trees are cut, left to dry, burnt in order to
remove foliage and smaller branches, and their trunks are split into
smaller logs. Log diameter is an important factor in fuel selection
because logs will burn slower and for longer periods of time (which

suits the Fang requirements for cooking, smoking and other purposes) compared to thinner branches and twig wood. As it has
been noted by other ethnoarchaeological studies (cf. Dufraisse
et al., 2007, p. 121; Zapata et al., 2003, p. 173) botanical species
per se does not constitute a criterion in ﬁrewood selection. When
the Fang use wood as raw material, for manufacturing or timber,
they tend to select species that are recognized as more appropriate
for these purposes. By contrast, when they collect ﬁrewood they do
so indiscriminately, the most important criteria being log diameter
and ease of collection rather than botanical species. Yet, this does
not preclude all consideration of species in relation to local perceptions of ﬁrewood classiﬁcation. Fang men and women commonly
perceive as ‘‘good fuels’’ dense and hard woods that burn slowly
and do not produce too much smoke. In relation to this concept,
there are ‘‘ideal’’ ﬁrewood species and others that are considered
as low quality fuels. During interviews Picornell documented 16
species that were considered by more than three individuals as
‘‘appropriate ﬁrewood’’ (Table 4). It is interesting, however, that
this concept of ‘‘good fuel’’ remains inoperative when it comes to
the routine provisioning of the household energy needs. The only
instance in which it becomes applicable is when women face
shortages in the fuel regularly supplied from ﬁeld clearance and
must, as a result, undertake extra trips to cut small trees in the ekot
(fallow land). In this case, they will be selective in their choice of
species. In addition to this, there are other species that are gener-

Table 4
Botanical species used as fuel documented during ﬁeldwork.
Fang common
name

Botanical species

Perceived fuel value

Abengak

Anthocleista sp.

Andzitsing

Eurypetalum tessmannii

Asam

–

Asás

Macaranga barteri

Aséng

Musanga cecropioides

Atúiñ
Dúm

Harungana
madagascariensis
Ceiba pentandra

Ebaiñ
Ebébéng

Pentaclethra macrophylla
Margaritania discoidea

Edom

Cylicodiscus gabunensis

Elón

Erytroploeum guineense

Ewom

Coula edulis

Ewórgo

Bridelia micrantha

Kosé

–

Ngong Meban

Funtumia africana

Ngoran-ngoran

–

Ngún

Irvinga grandifolia

Ñuará
Olong

Tetrorchidium
didymostemon
Zanthoxylum heitzii

Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree considered a ‘‘good
fuel’’
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Avoided species
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Avoided species

Oyang

Xylopia aethiopica

Sene

Albizia adianthifolia

Used in case of fuel
shortages
Tree appreciated as
ﬁrewood
Used in case of fuel
shortages

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

ally considered as ‘‘bad fuels’’ (Table 4). Sene (Albizia adianthifolia)
and olong (Zanthoxylum heitzii) are not normally used as ﬁrewood
in the kitchen and the abá hearths alike, because they produce
too much smoke. Nevertheless, all interviewees agreed that they
would rather use sene and olong ﬁrewood from the orchards
belonging to their families instead of taking the extra effort of cutting trees in the ekot.
In addition to this, there are socially forbidden species which
are never used as ﬁrewood in the village ﬁreplaces, even if they
have been cut down during ﬁeld clearance. These are ebaiñ (Pentaclethra macrophylla) and ñuará (Tetrorchidium didymostemon) (see
also Table 4). The reason for their avoidance has to do with Fang
perceptions of nature and the categorization of plants. The Fang,
like other slash-and-burn societies inhabiting tropical rainforests
(cf. Descolà, 1988; Fons, 2004; Mallart, 2008; Viveiros de Castro,
1996) do not perceive nature as a separate entity from the human
sphere. Places, plants and animals are believed to be imbued with
spirits that constitute social entities, able to interact with people.
Both human and non-human elements of the environment have
a double nature: a tangible, visible one and another which is invisible and belongs to the domain of the spirits (Ngema-Obam, 1983).
In this sense plants, animals and ancestors are perceived as live
agents with whom the Fang interact in the course of their daily life.
Ebaiñ and ñuará represent such entities, which furthermore people
must keep away from the village. Ebaiñ is a big tree with large ligneous pods containing large seeds. Its name derives from the onomatopoeia of the noise produced by its pods when they burst open
as seeds mature. This noise frightens people when they hear it in
the forest and the tree is thus known as the ‘‘one who suddenly
shoots the crossbow in the middle of the forest’’ (Mallart, 2008,
p. 980). As a result, ebaiñ is considered to possess a very violent
spirit and the Fang believe that if they bring it into the village to
burn in their ﬁreplaces, it will be the cause of violent quarrels between household members and the community. The name ñuará
derives from the verb ñuarán, which means ‘‘to rot’’, ‘‘to decay’’.
The Fang thus believe that if somebody burns this wood the wealth
and richness of his/her family will decay. The ñuará will adversely
affect the fertility of the orchards and even the fertility of the women of the household. It can also be used malevolently, to bring
about such negative effects to other individuals by hiding a piece
of cloth taken by a person in its trunk or even by naming a ñuará
tree after this person.

Discussion
The question of which criteria determine fuel selection has been
widely debated in the literature. It has been argued, for example,
that ﬁrewood collection is always ‘‘selective’’ being linked to notions of preferred species (i.e., what constitutes ‘‘good fuel’’) and
thus that the species composition of archaeological charcoal
assemblages is likely to reﬂect such cultural ﬁlters (Piqué, 1999;
Smart and Hoffman, 1988). Similarly, analyses focusing on the
investigation of human impacts on past vegetation have usually
associated fuel ranking systems with changes in sample composition. Thus assumed ‘‘preferred’’ fuel species (e.g., dense and slow
burning taxa) are thought to be substituted in the medium to long
term by species with lower density and heat value, spiny or difﬁcult to collect taxa, and/or agricultural residues (e.g., animal dung)
in response to the depletion of preferred wood fuels due to their
over-exploitation (Miller and Smart, 1984; Miller, 1985). The ﬁnds
of our ethnoarchaeological research amongst the Fang query the
expectations of such models, which may be based on a very selective reading of the ethnographic literature (e.g., Smart and Hoffman, 1988) or implicitly assume the separation of ﬁrewood
collection from other subsistence activities and its operation pri-

381

marily as ‘‘resource extraction’’ with progressively adverse impacts
upon vegetation resources (e.g., Miller, 1985).
The Fang case study suggests that ﬁrewood choice sensu stricto
is not conditioned primarily by species but focuses, instead, on the
physical properties of wood (moisture content, size, diameter).
This ﬁnd agrees with previous research in wood fuel properties
across different cultural and ecological contexts (Dufraisse et al.,
2007; Johannessen and Hastorf, 1990; Théry-Parisot, 2002; Zapata
et al., 2003). In this sense, it is very interesting that while ‘‘good
fuel’’ criteria exist, their impact on actual fuel classiﬁcation is manifested only when extra labor investment in ﬁrewood gathering is
anticipated in order to provide justiﬁcation for extraordinary, nonroutine tasks (i.e., an extra trip with the sole purpose of collecting
fuel wood, or the cutting down of one or more trees to be converted into ﬁrewood). On the other hand, even if there does not appear to be a selective criterion (‘‘good fuel’’) operating in routine
daily ﬁrewood collection, there seems to be a restrictive one: socially forbidden species (ebaiñ, ñuará) are never used as fuel in
Fang villages. This is directly related to cultural perceptions of
the environment and systems of ethnobotanical classiﬁcation and
not strictly with chemical and physical properties of the wood of
each species. The Fang collect as ﬁrewood all the residues of ﬁeld
clearance except for those that are subject to social restrictions.
Similarly, restrictive criteria are applicable to the choice of catchment areas: ﬁrewood is always obtained from trees growing in
socialized spaces (tsií, ekot, mbut) never from the rainforest (afán)
where the spirits of plants, animals and the ancestors dwell. Generally, socially forbidden fuel species may be designated either for
their perceived negative properties or for positive (i.e., desirable)
ones such as their fruits and shade. Such issues, especially the
question of the social inaccessibility of particular vegetation catchments, are predictably difﬁcult to disentangle when it comes to
archaeological charcoal assemblages. The broader patterns of species representation (e.g., expected occurrence and frequency of
wood species in reconstructed vegetation units plotted against
their occurrence in archaeological charcoal samples) and, where
applicable, archaeological contexts (e.g., evidence for symbolically
or ritually structured behaviors, and/or written sources) may offer
useful starting points for considering the operation of restrictive
criteria in prehistoric fuel selection.
One might object that such behavioral patterns are unlikely to
be generally applicable as they are likely to occur principally in
ecological and socio-economic contexts characterized by net wood
‘‘abundance’’ (e.g., closed canopy forests, slash-and-burn shifting
cultivation systems, both applicable to the Fang case study). The
key question is how to realistically measure wood ‘‘abundance’’.
Archaeobotanical and ethnographic models ranking individual species based on combustion properties may overlook other vegetation-scale properties such as ease of ﬁrewood collection and
transportation. There is for example an extensive bibliography
especially for small-scale, subsistence farming societies suggesting
that the preferential collection of dry deadwood is commonly attested across different cultures and ecological contexts, ranging
from temperate woodlands and tropical forests to semiarid savannas and park woodlands; no studies have indicated that live trees
(even of taxa identiﬁed as ‘‘preferred fuels’’) are cut for the purpose
of fuel provisioning (bibliography surveyed in Asouti and Austin,
2005). Deadwood (standing or uprooted dead trees, fallen trunks
and stumps, rotting roots, decaying hollow trees, shed branches
and small round wood) is always found in woodlands due to environmental disturbances continuously creating and renewing its
supplies. Furthermore, several studies have indicated that even in
low density habitats (e.g., savannas or park woodlands) in arid
and semiarid regions year to year deadwood productivity is
remarkably stable, because it is primarily determined by factors
(e.g., wind and browser damage, fungal and insect attacks, weather

382

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

impacts) other than those affecting the productivity of living plants
(e.g., mean annual rainfall); in turn, stable deadwood productivity
suggests that fuel supplies and harvesting patterns can be predicted and thus managed (Shackleton, 1998). Rates of fuel extraction will depend on the technologies used: hand-collection
removes substantially less wood (by leaving behind large trunks
and very small pieces) compared to mechanized collection (saws,
machinery) that may result in quick depletion of the available supplies (Shackleton, 1998).
Research by Asouti (2003b, 2005, in press, forthcoming) and
other authors (see reviews in Asouti and Austin, 2005; Marguerie
and Hunot, 2007) has indicated that deadwood is ubiquitous in
prehistoric charcoal assemblages. Although ascertaining the cause
and degree of decay is not always straightforward when analyzing
partially preserved charred wood fragments, their regular presence
at the very least suggests that old-growth and/or persistent (i.e.,
long-lived) woodland habitats were available and harvested for
fuel by prehistoric communities. Especially for the Near East and
the Balkans, where there is no pollen or sedimentological evidence
for woodland clearance and deforestation pre-dating the Early
Bronze Age, it is very plausible that fuel, timber and fodder/graze
procurement was managed in sustainable ways (cf. Asouti, in
press; Willis, 1995; Willis and Bennet, 1994). Charcoal analysis
from the Neolithic tell site of Çatalhöyük in central Anatolia has
demonstrated that even in this case of a substantial community
that was settled in the same location for 1000 years and practiced
mixed agro-pastoral production, there is no evidence for the depletion of ‘‘preferred fuels’’ through time, while dung also appears to
have been used as a complementary source of fuel (perhaps seasonally) rather than as a substitute for wood (Asouti, 2005, in
press, forthcoming; Asouti and Austin, 2005). The management
of dry deadwood most likely played a major role in the long-term
sustainability of fuel collection strategies (Asouti, 2005).
Our ethnographic case study indicates that perceptions of ﬁrewood availability are conditioned primarily by their economic context and associated subsistence strategies, to which the habitual
collection of fuel for supplying of household energy needs is fully
integrated. Fang ﬁrewood is the by-product of ﬁeld clearance and
preparation, while its collection and transport back to the settlement, and its consumption in domestic ﬁreplaces, occur in tandem
with routine food provisioning and cooking tasks. This observation
is in general agreement with ethnographic and anthropological research on the fuel management strategies practiced by subsistence
farming communities in other world regions as well (discussed
more extensively by Asouti and Austin, 2005). It is possible therefore to outline with some degree of reliability key features of ﬁrewood collection practices: (a) the integration of fuel collection
routines to the full spectrum of subsistence activities including
foddering, gathering and timber provisioning, (b) the medium- to
long-term curation of vegetation resources through recycling
(e.g., of defunct timber and wooden implements), and (c) the use
of complementary energy sources, such as dry deadwood and
dung, as fuel (Asouti and Austin, 2005). The co-evaluation of
high-resolution charcoal data with other categories of archaeological evidence (architecture, hearth structure and function, seed
archaeobotany, animal bone, soil micromorphology, population
size) has assisted in determining the applicability of these principles in the case of Çatalhöyük (Asouti, 2005). Furthermore, ecological, ethnographic and anthropological research in different world
regions has indicated that it is primarily the disruption of the
prevailing economic strategies by socio-political and attendant
ecological change, rather than climate- or human-induced ﬂuctuations in the net availability of wood species, that may bring about
major shifts in land use, including woodland exploitation (cf. AlBakri et al., 2001; Ali and Benjaminsen, 2004; Becker, 2001; Briscoe, 1979; Ellis, 2000; Reid et al., 2000; Saheli et al., 2008; Schweik

et al., 1997). The conclusions of such studies converge in suggesting that ﬁrewood shortages emerge and eventually become irreversible once the energy demands of specialized craft industries
need to be accommodated (e.g., metalworking), secondary products economies develop (e.g., arboriculture, expansion of pastoral
production leading to vegetation clearance for the establishment
of orchards and overgrazing respectively), market dependencies
evolve and ownership of, and access to, the land and its resources
is restricted by centralized systems of political and administrative
control (Asouti and Fuller, 2008; Asouti, in press). In turn, such
considerations should be built into anthracological research, with
the aim to elucidate the degree to which ﬂuctuations in the composition of charcoal assemblages may correlate with shifts in
socioeconomic practices. If such correlations can be established,
it is possible that changes in charcoal sample composition may reﬂect a re-orientation of ﬁrewood management strategies and goals,
and their complex landscape interactions with other economic
activities (e.g., craft and pastoral production) rather than the progressively adverse, unidirectional human impact on past vegetation due to wood fuel collection per se.

Conclusions
Prevailing theoretical models in the ﬁeld of charcoal analysis
such as the Principle of Least Effort (PLE) predict that in environments with abundant woody vegetation human groups will collect
dry wood of particular species in accordance with their desirability
as fuel, while selective criteria decline in importance in environments of low wood availability when fuel collection may become
more indiscriminate (Shackleton and Prins, 1992). The Fang case
study suggests that the classic PLE model can be expanded further
by incorporating ﬁrewood management to the analysis of the
broader economic strategies pursued by a given community. Perceptions of fuel scarcity amongst the Fang are not determined by
net wood species availability in the local vegetation. Instead, they
are integrally linked to the cycles of clearance and regeneration of
secondary vegetation in cultivated land (orchards). Furthermore,
criteria based on perceptions of ‘‘good fuel’’ are applicable only
when the extra effort (translated into dedicated fuel collection
trips) and labor (cutting down trees for fuel outside the clearance
cycle) need to be justiﬁed as a response to shortages in the fuel
supplies (vegetation clearance by-products) routinely exploited
by each household. Finally, it should be stressed that no fuel collection occurs in vegetation catchments (i.e., the rainforest) that lay
outside the socio-economic and cultural milieu of the villages.
In light of these observations, which are compatible with ecological, ethnographic and anthropological studies of fuel management practices in other world regions, we believe that it is
necessary to re-direct the focus of the interpretation of archaeological charcoal assemblages away from strictly deﬁned notions of
‘‘preferred fuel’’ species availability. This in itself is not a novel
observation as it has been previously observed that it is the form
and moisture content of the wood rather than botanical species
that determine availability (Théry-Parisot et al., 2010). What is novel is the proposition, expanding on previous work by us and other
scholars in the ﬁeld of anthracology, that ﬁrewood collection forms
an integral part of the social and economic life of pre-modern (in
the economic sense of the term) societies. Therefore, just as it happens with other activities situated in the socio-economic sphere, it
is governed by a broad spectrum of socio-cultural considerations
that are not necessarily conditioned by species properties and their
net availability and actual proportions in woodland vegetation
(Asouti, in press, forthcoming; Asouti and Austin, 2005; Becker,
2001; Beauclair et al., 2009; Peluso, 1996). In relation to this, we
suggest that other PLE-inspired models used to predict patterns

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

of ﬁrewood selection and management drawing on the principles
of behavioral ecology (relating resource availability, use value
and handling costs sensu stricto; cf. Marston, 2009; Rubiales
et al., 2011) could also be improved through the consideration of
culture-sensitive ethnographic studies and by building in socioeconomic variables. Notions of ‘‘optimal behavior’’ in habitual
practices of fuel collection and consumption must compute additional variables besides energy output, species availability, distance from habitation sites and ﬂoristic composition of
vegetation units, if they are to produce realistic scenarios that
can be credibly tested against the archaeological record of speciﬁc
regions and time periods reﬂecting particular socio-economic, cultural and ecological contexts. Relevant variables include population size, wood extraction technologies, economic organization
and change through time, socio-cultural factors, risk avoidance,
compatibility with other economic and subsistence tasks, seasonality, and fuel storage or the lack thereof. It becomes evident therefore that, in practical terms, such an approach cannot be limited to
the analysis of charcoal data in isolation, but must also involve an
evaluation of multiple sources of evidence including seed archaeobotany, zooarchaeology, soil micromorphology, wood harvesting
technologies, hearth structure and properties plus settlement
structure/organization, and symbolic and ritual behaviors, if the
aim is to achieve data-informed, realistic interpretations of prehistoric ﬁrewood management practices and landscape perceptions in
their local and regional contexts.
Acknowledgments
Llorenç Picornell wishes to thank the individuals and institutions that supported his ﬁeldwork in Equatorial Guinea, in particular the people from Moka, Ngong and Misergue, especially
Amancio Mba Mitogo and his family in Misergue, for granting
him permission to participate in their daily activities and learn
about their culture. He is also indebted to Pablo Esono (National
Herbarium of Bata, INDEFOR-AP) for his help with botanical identiﬁcations and to LRO-CEIBA and the Centro Cultural Español de
Bata for facilitating ﬁeld research. The concepts on which this paper has been based were presented for the ﬁrst time in a research
seminar jointly presented by Llorenç Picornell and Eleni Asouti at
the School of Archaeology, Classics and Egyptology of the University of Liverpool. Thanks are due to the Spanish Ministry of Education for the FPU grant (AP2006-00725) that enabled Picornell’s
research stay at SACE of the University of Liverpool for a period
of 2 months in 2009. We would also like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their useful comments that helped improving
the article.
References
Al-Bakri, J.T., Taylor, J.C., Brewer, T.R., 2001. Monitoring land use change in the Badia
transition zone in Jordan using aerial photography and satellite imagery. The
Geographical Journal 167 (3), 248–262.
Albuquerque, U.P., Lucena, R.F.P., Monteiro, J.M., Florentino, A.T.N., Almeida, C.B.R.,
2006. Evaluating two quantitative ethnobotanical techniques. Ethnobotany
Research and Applications 4, 51–60.
Ali, J., Benjaminsen, T.A., 2004. Fuelwood, timber and deforestation in the
Himalayas: the case of Basho valley, Baltistan Region, Pakistan. Mountain
Research and Development 24 (4), 312–318.
Allué, E., Vernet, J.-L., Cebrià, A., 2009. Holocene vegetational landscapes of NE
Iberia: charcoal analysis from Cova de la Guineu, Barcelona, Spain. Holocene 19
(5), 765–773.
Asouti, E., 2003a. Wood charcoal from Santorini (Thera): new evidence for climate,
vegetation and timber imports in the Aegean Bronze Age. Antiquity 77, 471–
484.
Asouti, E., 2003b. Woodland vegetation and fuel exploitation at the prehistoric
campsite of Pınarbasßı, south-central Anatolia, Turkey: the evidence from the
wood charcoal macro-remains. Journal of Archaeological Science 30 (9), 1185–
1201.
Asouti, E., 2005. Woodland vegetation and the exploitation of fuel and timber at
Neolithic Çatalhöyük: report on the wood charcoal macro-remains. In: Hodder,

383

I. (Ed.), Inhabiting Çatalhöyük: Reports from the 1995–9 Seasons. Oxbow/
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, Oxford, pp. 213–258.
Asouti, E., in press. The ecology and socioeconomics of woodland exploitation
practices in prehistoric Anatolia. In: Wawruschka, C. (Ed.), Prehistoric
Economies of Anatolia: Subsistence Strategies and Exchange. Austrian
Academy of Sciences, Vienna.
Asouti, E., forthcoming. Rethinking human impact on prehistoric vegetation in
Southwest Asia: socioeconomics and long-term fuel/timber acquisition
strategies at Neolithic Çatalhöyük. In: 5th International Meeting of Charcoal
Analysis: Charcoal as Cultural and Biological Heritage, 5–10 September, 2011.
Department of Archaeology and Prehistory, University of Valencia, Spain.
Asouti, E., Austin, P., 2005. Reconstructing woodland vegetation and its exploitation
by past societies, based on the analysis and interpretation of archaeological
wood charcoal macroremains. Environmental Archaeology 10, 1–18.
Asouti, E., Fuller, D.Q., 2008. Trees and Woodlands of South India. Archaeological
Perspectives. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
Asouti, E., Hather, J., 2001. Charcoal analysis and the reconstruction of ancient
woodland vegetation in the Konya Basin, south-central Anatolia, Turkey: results
from the Neolithic site of Çatalhöyük East. Vegetation History and
Archaeobotany 10, 23–32.
Beauclair, M., Scheel-Ybert, R., Bianchini, G.F., Buarque, G., 2009. Fire and ritual:
bark hearths in South-American Tupiguarani mortuary rites. Journal of
Archaeological Science 36, 1409–1415.
Becker, L.C., 2001. Seeing green in Mali’s woods: colonial legacy, forest use, and local
control. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (3), 504–526.
Bogaard, A., 2005. ‘Garden agriculture’ and the nature of early farming in Europe
and the Near East. World Archaeology 37 (2), 177–196.
Boyd, B., 2002. Ways of eating/ways of being in the Later Epipalaeolithic (Natuﬁan)
Levant. In: Hamilakis, Y., Pluciennik, M., Tarlow, S. (Eds.), Thinking Through the
Body: Archaeologies of Corporeality. Kluwer/Plenum, New York, pp. 137–152.
Briscoe, J., 1979. Energy use and social structure in a Bangladesh village. Population
and Development Review 5 (4), 615–641.
Carrière, S., 2003. Les orphelins de la foret. Practiques paysanes et écologie
forestière. Les Ntumu du Sud-Cameroun. IRD Éditions, Paris.
Chabal, L., 1997. Forêts et sociétés en Languedoc (Néolithique ﬁnal, Antiquité
tardive). L’anthracologie, méthode et paléoécologie. Documents d’Archéologie
Française 63, Eds. de la Maison des Sciences de L’Home-CNRS, Paris.
Chabal, L., Fabre, L., Terral, J.F., Théry-Parisot, I., 1999. L’anthracologie. In: Ferdière,
A. (Ed.), La Botanique. Errance, Paris, pp. 43–104.
Damblon, F., Court-Picon, M. (Eds.), 2008. 4th International Meeting of
Anthracology; Charcoal and Microcharcoal; Continental and Marine
Records; Abstracts. Geological Survey of Belgium Professional Paper No.
303, Brussels.
David, N., 1992. Integrating ethnoarchaeology: a subtle realist perspective. Journal
of Anthropological Archaeology 11, 330–359.
David, N., Kramer, C., 2006. Ethnoarchaeology in Action. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Delhon, C., Thiébault, S., Berger, J.-F., 2009. Environment and landscape
management during the Middle Neolithic in Southern France: evidence for
agro-sylvo-pastoral systems in the Middle Rhone Valley. Quaternary
International 200 (1–2), 50–65.
Descolà, P., 1988. La selva culta. Simbolismo y praxis en la ecología de los Achuar.
Abya-Yala, Quito.
Dufraisse, A., Pétrequin, A.M., Pétrequin, P., 2007. La gestion du bois de feu: un
indicateur des contextes socioécologiques. Approche ethnoarcheologique dans
les Hautes Terres de Papua (Nouvelle-Guinée indonésienne). In: Besse, M. (Dir.),
Actes du 27e colloque sur le Néolithique, Lausanne, pp. 115–126.
Ellis, F., 2000. Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing Countries. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Emery-Barbier, A., Thiébault, S., 2005. Preliminary conclusions on the Late Glacial
vegetation in south-west Anatolia (Turkey): the complementary nature of
palynological and anthracological approaches. Journal of Archaeological Science
32 (8), 1232–1251.
Fa, J., 1991. La conservación de los ecosistemas en Guinea Ecuatorial. IUCN,
Cambridge.
Fairbairn, A.S., 2005. A history of agricultural production at Neolithic Çatalhöyük
East, Turkey. World Archaeology 37 (2), 197–210.
Figueiral, I., Mosbrugger, V., 2000. A review of charcoal analysis as a tool for
assessing Quaternary and Tertiary environments: achievements and limits.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 164, 397–407.
Fiorentino, G., Magri, D., 2008. Charcoals from the past: cultural and
palaeoenvironmental implications. In: Proceedings of the Third International
Meeting of Anthracology. BAR International Series 1807. Archaeopress, Oxford.
Fons, V., 2004. Entre dos aguas. Etnomedicina, procreación y salud entre los ndowé
de Guinea Ecuatorial. CEIBA, Vic.
Garcia, J.E., Mba, J., 1997. Distribution, status and conservation of primates in Monte
Alen National Park, Equatorial Guinea. Oryx 31, 67–76.
González Ruibal, A., 2003. La experiencia del Otro. Una introducción a la
etnoarqueología. Akal, Madrid.
Heinz, C., Figueiral, I., Terral, J.-F., Claustre, F., 2004. Holocene vegetation changes in
the northwestern Mediterranean: new palaeoecological data from charcoal
analysis and quantitative eco-anatomy. The Holocene 14, 621–627.
Heizer, R.F., 1963. Domestic fuel in primitive society. Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 93, 186–194.
Henry, A., Théry-Parisot, I., Voronkova, E., 2009. La gestion du bois de feu en forêt
boréale: problématique archéo-anthracologique et étude d’un cas

384

L. Picornell Gelabert et al. / Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30 (2011) 375–384

ethnographique (région de l’Amour, Sibérie). In: Théry-Parisot, I., Costamagno,
S., Henry, A. (Eds.), Gestion des combustibles au paléolithique et au
mésolithique. BAR International Series 1914, London, pp. 17–38.
Ingold, T., 1988. What is an Animal? One World Archaeological Series No. 1. Unwin
Hyman, London.
Ingold, T., 2000. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling
and Skill. Routledge, London.
Johannessen, S., Hastorf, C., 1990. A history of fuel management (A.D. 500 to the
present) in the Mantaro Valey, Peru. Journal of Ethnobiology 10 (1), 61–90.
Mallart, L., 2008. El sistema mèdic d’una societat africana. Els evuzok del Camerun.
Institut d’Estudis Catalans, Barcelona.
Marguerie, D., Hunot, J.-Y., 2007. Charcoal analysis and dendrology: data from
archaeological sites in north-western France. Journal of Archaeological Science
34, 1417–1433.
Marston, J.M., 2009. Modeling wood acquisition strategies from archaeological
charcoal remains. Journal of Archaeological Science 36, 2192–2200.
Miller, N.F., 1985. Palaeoethnobotanical evidence for deforestation in ancient Iran: a
case study of urban Malyan. Journal of Ethnobiology 5, 1–19.
Miller, N.F., Smart, T.L., 1984. Intentional burning of dung as fuel: a mechanism for
the incorporation of charred seeds into the archaeological record. Journal of
Ethnobiology 4, 15–28.
Nerín, G., 2010. La última selva de España. Antropófagos, misioneros y guardias
civiles. Libros de la Catarata, Madrid.
Ngema-Obam, P., 1983. Aspects de la religion Fang. Karthala, París.
O’Day, S.J., Van Neer, W., Ervynck, A. (Eds.), 2004. Behaviour Behind Bones: The
Zooarchaeology of Ritual, Religion, Status and Identity. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
Palmer, C., Van der Veen, M., 2002. Archaeobotany and the social context of food.
Acta Palaeobotanica 42 (2), 195–202.
Peluso, N.L., 1996. Fruit trees and family trees in an anthropogenic forest: ethics of
access, property zones and environmental change in Indonesia. Comparative
Studies in Society and History 38, 510–548.
Picornell, L., 2008. Què es crema i què no es crema? Etnoarqueologia del
combustible entre els Fang de Guinea Equatorial. Unpublished Master Thesis,
Universitat de Barcelona.
Picornell, L., 2009. Antracología y Etnoarqueología. Perspectivas para el estudio de
las relaciones entre las sociedades humanas y su entorno. Complutum 20 (1),
133–151.
Piqué, R., 1999. Producción y uso de combustible vegetal: una evaluación
arqueológica. Treballs d’Etnoarqueologia 3, Universitat Autònoma de
Barceona, Bellaterra.
Reid, R.S., Kruska, R.L., Muthui, N., Taye, A., Wotton, S., Wilson, C.J., Mulatu, W.,
2000. Land-use and land-cover dynamics in response to changes in climatic,
biological and socio-political forces: the case of southwestern Ethiopia.
Landscape Ecology 15, 339–355.
Rist, J., 2007. Bushmeat Catch per Unit Effort in Space and Time: A Monitoring Tool
for Bushmeat Hunting. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Imperial College London,
University of London.
Rist, J., Rowcliffe, M., Cowlishaw, G., Milner-Gulland, E.J., 2007. Evaluating measures
of hunting effort in a bushmeat system. Biological Conservation 141 (8), 2086–
2099.
Rival, L. (Ed.), 1998. The Social Life of Trees: Anthropological Perspectives on Tree
Symbolism. Berg, Oxford.
Rubiales, J.M., Henrnández, L., Romero, F., Sanz, C., 2011. The use of forest resources
in central Iberia during the Late Iron Age. Insights from the wood charcoal

analysis of Pintia, a Vaccaean oppidum. Journal of Archaeological Science 38, 1–
10.
Sabater-Pi, J., 1981. Exploitation of gorillas (Gorilla g. gorilla) Savage and Wymann
1847, in Rio Muni, Republic of. Equatorial Guinea, W. Africa. Biological
Conservation 19, 131–140.
Saheli, A., Wilhelmsson, E., Söderberg, U., 2008. Land cover changes in a forested
watershed, south Zagros, Iran. Land Degradation and Development 19, 542–553.
Sayer, J.A., Harcourt, C.S., Collins, N.M., 1992. The Conservation Atlas of Tropical
Forests: Africa. Macmillian, London.
Schweik, C.M., Adhikari, K., Pandit, K.N., 1997. Land-cover change and social
institutions: a comparison of two sub-basins in the southern Siwalik hills of
Nepal. Mountain Research and Development 17 (2), 99–116.
Shackleton, C.M., 1998. Annual production of harvestable deadwood in semi-arid
savannas, South Africa. Forest Ecology and Management 112, 139–144.
Shackleton, C.M., Prins, F., 1992. Charcoal analysis and the principle of least effort –
a conceptual model. Journal of Archaeological Science 19, 631–637.
Smart, T.L., Hoffman, E.S., 1988. Environmental interpretation of archaeological
charcoal. In: Hastorf, C.A., Popper, V.S. (Eds.), Current Paleoethnobotany:
Analytical Methods and Cultural Interpretations of Archaeological Plant
Remains. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 167–205.
Stevens, C.J., 2003. An investigation of agricultural consumption and production
models for prehistoric and Roman Britain. Environmental Archaeology 8, 61–76.
Théry-Parisot, I., 2002. Gathering of ﬁrewood during the Palaeolithic. In: Thiébault, S.
(Ed.), Charcoal Analysis. Methodological Approaches, Palaeoecological Results
and Wood Uses. BAR International Series 1063. Archaeopress, Oxford, pp. 243–
249.
Théry-Parisot, I., Chabal, L., Chrzavzez, J., 2010. Anthracology and taphonomy, from
wood gathering to charcoal analysis. A review of the taphonomic processes
modifying charcoal assemblages, in archaeological contexts. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 291 (1–2), 142–153.
Thiébault, S. (Ed.), 2002. Charcoal Analysis. Methodological Approaches,
Palaeoecological Results and Wood Uses. British Archaeological Reports 1063.
Archaeopress, Oxford.
Van der Veen, M., 2005. Gardens and ﬁelds: the intensity and scale of food
production. World Archaeology 37 (2), 157–163.
Vernet, J.L., 1992. Les charbons de bois, les anciens écosystèmes et le rôle de
l’homme. Actes du colloque, Montpellier. Bulletin de la Société Botanique de
France 139, Paris.
Vernet, J.L., Thiébault, S., 1987. An approach to northwestern Mediterranean recent
prehistoric vegetation and ecologic implication. Journal of Biogeography 14,
117–127.
Viveiros De Castro, E., 1996. Os pronotes cosmológicos e o perspectivismo
ameríndio. Mana 2 (2), 115–144.
Western, C.A., 1971. The ecological interpretation of ancient charcoals from Jericho.
Levant 3, 31–40.
Willis, K.J., 1995. The pollen-sedimentological evidence for the beginning of
agriculture in southeastern Europe and Anatolia. Poročilo o raziskovanju
paleolitika, neolitika in eneolitika v Sloveniji XXII, Ljubljana, pp. 9–24.
Willis, K.J., Bennet, K.D., 1994. The Neolithic transition: fact or ﬁction?
Palaeoecological evidence from the Balkans. The Holocene 4, 326–330.
Zapata, L., Peña, L., Ibánez, J.J., González Ruibal, J.E., 2003. Ethnoarchaeology in the
Morocan Jebala (Western Riff): wood and dung as fuel. Food, fuel and ﬁelds. In:
Neumann, K., Butler, A., Kahlheber, Z. (Eds.), Process in African Archaeobotany.
Barth-Institut-Hendrik, Köln, pp. 163–175.

