Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jas

Earth, wind, and fire: ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza fires
Carolina Mallol a,b,*, Frank W. Marlowe b,c, Brian M. Wood b, Claire C. Porter b
a

CNRS, UMR 6636, MMSH, 5 rue du Château de l’Horloge, BP 647, 13094 Aix-en-Provence, France
Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, 11 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
c
Department of Anthropology, Florida State University, 1847 West Tennessee Street, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA
b

Received 15 December 2006; received in revised form 15 February 2007; accepted 19 February 2007

Abstract
We present the preliminary results of an interdisciplinary ethno-geoarchaeological project aimed at characterizing sedimentary aspects of
recent combustion structures through soil micromorphology to obtain empirical parameters with which to interpret archaeological features. Micromorphological analyses of five different types of fires made and abandoned by the Hadza of Tanzania were performed and compared with
ethnographic descriptions. Their anthropogenic nature, burning intensity and type of fuel used were identified based on the composition and
optical features of the microscopic components of the combustion structure. The data provided elements to assess the preservation potential
of open air fires and our ability to interpret their function. The life history of two of the fires was reconstructed: a sleeping fire showed evidence
of a pre-existing trampled surface, and a communal cooking fire showed evidence of the scooping out of ashes for maintenance. These findings
substantiate the important contribution of ethnoarchaeological research conducted jointly with soil micromorphology in discovering cues of human behavior preserved in the sedimentary record.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ethnoarchaeology; Ethno-geoarchaeology; Soil Micromorphology; Fire; Combustion structure; Hadza; Hunter-gatherer

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to assess the prospects for tracing
the sedimentary components of controlled use of fire in the
past. The archaeological manifestation of a combustion structure, often detected from the presence of a delimited zone of
reddened or ashy sediment, might include burnt bones, artifacts, artificially arranged stones or concentrated charcoal
fragments. For their purely anthropogenic nature, these items
enclose behavioral information including technical and functional aspects of the combustion structure, its duration of use
and its life history. Some studies on this topic have been
concerned with the burnt items found within the combustion
structure, analyzing their spatial distribution (Vaquero and
Pastó, 2001) or their physical and chemical properties (Stiner
* Corresponding author. CNRS, UMR 6636, MMSH, 5 rue du Château de
l’Horloge, BP 647, 13094 Aix-en-Provence, France.
E-mail address: mallol@mmsh.univ-aix.fr (C. Mallol).
0305-4403/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jas.2007.02.002

et al., 1995). Others have focused on the properties of the
burnt sediment, using various geophysical and geochemical
techniques (Barbetti, 1986; Bellomo, 1991, 1993; Karkanas
et al., 2002; Rudner and Sumegi, 2002; Schiegl et al., 2004).
We apply the technique of soil micromorphology, which
entails the study of microscopic components and structures
of soils and sediments aimed at the reconstruction of events.
The changes caused by fire occurring in the top few centimeters of a burnt soil or sediment are nonreversible. Thus, when
this top layer is preserved, micromorphological analysis can
potentially answer questions concerning the kind of fuel employed, the function of the combustion structure, the temperature reached, the number of burning episodes represented, the
effects on the surrounding sediments, and the degree of postdepositional reworking (Courty et al., 1989). Experimental
soil micromorphology has yielded numerous contributions to
the characterization of combustion features (Courty et al.,
1989; Macphail et al., 2004; Wattez, 1992). This technique
has also been previously applied to archaeological combustion

2036

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

structures, successfully distinguishing single burning events
from multiphased hearths (Meignen et al., 1989; Wattez,
1992), in situ hearths from secondary ash dumps (Schiegl
et al., 2003) and domestic hearths from burned stabling layers
(Macphail et al., 2004).
Most of the micromorphological case studies analyze Middle or Upper Palaeolithic sites, which have abundant evidence
of combustion structures (Meignen et al., 2001, 1989; Schiegl
et al., 1996, 2003; Vallverdú, 2001; Wattez, 1992; Weiner
et al., 2002). The technique has not been used to investigate
earlier sites, such as early Palaeolithic hominin sites in Africa,
where the evidence is more scant and the main problem is to
distinguish between natural and anthropogenic fires (see James
(1989, 1996) for a review of the evidence). Nonetheless, the
potential of soil micromorphology in such cases has been
demonstrated (Goldberg et al., 2001; Weiner et al., 1998).
We focus on contemporary fires made by the Hadza of
Tanzania (for ethnographic background and studies of Hadza
behavioral ecology, see Marlowe, 2002, 2003, 2004 and
Wood, 2006). Through an ethno-geoarchaeological approach,
we developed an experiment coupling sedimentary information obtained from soil micromorphology from different types
of Hazda fires with ethnographic descriptions. The Hadza live
in open air camps, and the sedimentary signatures of their refuse could provide referential inferences with which to interpret archaeological contexts from similar settings, such as in
prehistoric open air sites. The Hadza make fire for many reasons, which we have classified into the following scheme
(Table 1): (1) household hearths in camp; (2) sleeping fires inside their huts; (3) temporary communal cooking hearths in
camp; (4) tuber roasting fires away from the camp; (5) meat
cooking fires away from the camp; (6) special monkey roasting fires; (7) torch making fires to get honey away from the
camp; (8) fires to light cigarettes; (9) night and day ambush
hunting hearths; (10) fires for straightening arrows and curving
bows; (11) burning grass fires.
Ethnographic observations show that ephemeral surface
fires may prove difficult to detect after the wind blows the remains around. On the other hand, when the earth is scooped
out very deeply and fires burn for a long time, it is easier to
detect and recognize as human controlled actions, possibly
many years or millennia afterwards. To provide empirical
data on this question, we collected and analyzed sediment
samples from recently abandoned Hadza fires, which allowed
us to investigate and document the effect of these fires on their
corresponding sedimentary substrates.
There are few examples of studies using an ethnoarchaeological approach to soil micromorphology with the goal of obtaining reference material on anthropogenic fires (Goldberg
and Whitebread, 1993; Wattez, 1992). We analyzed samples
from five Hadza combustion structures of different known
location, function and duration. Our data allow us to compare
the effects of outdoor fires vs. fires in a semi-sheltered space,
cooking fires vs. sleeping fires, and very brief vs. prolonged
burning events. Such distinctions have not been previously
documented in micromorphological terms. The absolute age
since abandonment of each of the sampled combustion

structures varies: some samples were collected a few days
after the burning event and others up to 1 year later. Thus,
our data also provide information on the relative effect of taphonomic agents such as wind, rainfall and invading roots over
time, offering an insight into the preservation potential of
such combustion structures.

2. Methods
Two of us (C.P. and B.W.) collected the micromorphological samples from the following different types of Hadza fires.
(1) An impala burning fire. The fire was burning for about
20 min, and was sampled 10 days later.
(2) An open air cooking fire by a hut. The fire was burning
continuously for 4 months, and was sampled 1 year later.
(3) A sleeping fire at the entrance of the same hut (2 samples).
The fire was burning continuously for 4 months, and was
sampled 1 year later.
(4) A tuber roasting fire. The fire was burning for about
15 min, and was sampled 1 day later.
(5) An open air two-family cooking fire. The fire was burning
for 3 months, and was sampled 2 months later.
In each case, sampling involved cutting out small (approximately 7 cm  4 cm  4 cm) blocks of sediment from the
abandoned combustion structure. This was achieved by gently
removing and quickly wrapping the block of sediment in toilet
paper and then packing tape. In some occasions, where the
substrate was too loose to be removed in one piece, it was necessary to remove the sediments by softly hammering a tin can
into the combustion structure.
Where possible, the samples were carefully collected exactly at ground level so as not to miss any fraction of the combustion structure. The substrate of the sampled areas is an
acidic, dry, sandy terrain. Details on the morphology and ethnographic observations of each type of fire will accompany the
micromorphological descriptions in the Section 3 of this paper, and summaries of all the data are presented in Tables 3
and 4.
The micromorphological samples were processed at the
Geoarchaeology Laboratory of P. Goldberg, Boston University, where they were oven dried, hardened with a non-saturated mix of polyester resin and styrene, and cut into 1 cm
slabs for thin section preparation. Thin sections of 7 cm 
5 cm and 30 microns in thickness were manufactured by Spectrum Petrographics Inc. They were observed under a polarizing
microscope at 40, 100 and 200 magnifications and described
following the standard guidelines of Stoops (2003) with
reference to Courty et al. (1989) and Wattez (1992), who in
a comprehensive analysis of experimental, archaeological
and ethnoarchaeological samples, obtained a series of control
parameters for the analysis of anthropogenic combustion
structures based on the optical characteristics of different sedimentary components at different burning intensities (Table 2).

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2037

Table 1
Ethnographic descriptions of the kinds of fire the Hadza make
1

Household hearth in camp

2

Sleeping fire inside a hut

3

Temporary communal cooking
hearth in camp

4

Tuber roasting fire away from
the camp

5

Meat cooking fire away from
the camp
Special monkey roasting fire

6

7

Torch making fire to get honey
(away from the camp)

8

Fire to light cigarettes

9

Night and day ambush hunting
hearth

10

Fire to straighten arrows and
curve bows

11

Burning grass fire

At just about every household, whether a grass hut or just a hacked out bush or rock shelter, there will be a
hearth that is used for cooking. This fire is the one kept going at all times by stirring coals. Even when it
appears to be out, it is easy to bring it back to flame. Because the average occupation of a camp is about 1e3
months long, this hearth will usually be maintained that long.
A hearth is usually built inside a hut or at the sleeping spot. This is used for warmth while sleeping. The fire
is usually kept going on or at least revived every day. When there is no hut the household hearth often serves
both purposes: cooking and providing warmth for sleep.
A short-term hearth that could be in the men’s place or women’s place e under the best shade trees. This fire is
communal; occasionally some food is cooked on it when all are sitting and eating together. The fire will also be
used to work bows and arrows and coals used to light cigarettes or pipes.
When women finish their task of digging tubers, they usually roast up some of them before they take the rest
back to camp. They grab some tinder from nearby and have a sizeable bonfire going in a minute or two. This
fire is made on top of the ground, not scooped out, and is usually burning with flames about 2 or 3 feet high
and gradually allowed to die down as the tubers, which are placed on top of the burning limbs in the middle
of the flames are turned over and more added while others are removed. They are roasted for an average of
5e10 min. After pulling them all out, the fire is allowed to die out. Thus, these fires typically last about
10e15 min altogether and are one-time occurrences.
A bonfire resembling the tuber roasting fire is made away from camp when a man or group of men roasts an
animal that has just been killed.
The same technique as numbers 4 and 5 is used in camp for baboons and vervet monkeys, which are difficult
to skin. The animal is placed on top of the flames in order to remove its hair and facilitate pulling the skin
off afterwards.
When a man or men are out looking for honey and find a promising hive high in a baobab tree full of the
stinging bee (Apis mellifera adansonii), upon deciding the hive is worth the effort, they will use their fire stick
to make a grass fire and then add small twigs. After getting it started, they will cut pegs to use for climbing up
the tree. When ready, they find an appropriate piece of wood to set afire and use as a torch. They climb up to
the hive and place the torch inside to smoke and stun the bees. After pulling the honeycomb out, they will
drop the torch and climb down to eat. They carry some honey off if they have some leftover, leaving the fire
smoldering beneath the tree. This fire may burn with flames for about 10e15 min altogether. These fires are
made on the ground surface.
When men are out hunting and want to rest and smoke, they make a fire using their drill. They use dry grass
and keep it going long enough to light their cigarette or pipe. Thus, this is probably the most ephemeral fire.
It might only be burning for a minute or so, though occasionally they will keep it going and light a second
cigarette.
When men are hunting by waiting in ambush near a waterhole, they make a fire that burns for many hours.
This is most often done at night in the late dry season when animals must come to get a drink. The animals
prefer to drink after dark in greater safety. Ambush hunting at night is always done in pairs of men rather than
a single man. They will get to the water before dusk and build a hearth-like fire, meaning a sizable, circular
area with plenty of tinder and eventually a large log or two. The hearth is not scooped out particularly, but
often because it must die down to embers and give off no light, they build it behind a mound of earth so that
when the animal approaches the water, the mound obscures even the slightest glow. The embers are kept hot by
stirring all night to provide warmth for the men who lie besides the hearth waiting and listening for game.
The fire smolders for 12 h straight.
A variation of this type of fire is made when men conduct an ambush hunt at waterholes in the day. The fire
does not have to be hidden as much and so may not be behind a mound, but somewhere not too visible. It is
at dawn and dusk that animals are most likely to come, so men must leave camp early enough to arrive at
first light and stay until almost dark. This fire is less required for warmth and so it is stirred less often. It is
used mainly for lighting cigarettes throughout the day.
One variant of multi-purpose fires, both in and out of camp, is when one or more tree limbs, still on the tree
and alive but close to the ground, is kept burning slowly for days. This type of fire does not need to be fed
with tinder and requires little or no maintenance.
When men are working on arrows or bows or making an ax they will use fire. This is usually in camp but
occasionally occurs out of camp. Men will have a fire that looks much like a cooking hearth and, in fact, it is
usually the communal fire at the men’s place, in which case, it is usually going all day. Men will hold their
arrows into the fire and then put them in their mouths to straighten the softened wood. They do the same
thing with a new bow, except in this case they are curving the wood and not using their mouth. When making
an ax, a man will use the heated up iron blade to burn a hole through the club-shaped wooden handle until he
can insert the blade clean through it. Usually this takes an hour or more, so the fire is maintained at high
temperature. Often, it will be the household cooking hearth or the communal men’s place hearth.
Men will sometimes start grass fires for a variety of reasons: (a) to eliminate the grass and keep the Datoga
pastoralists from coming around with their herds; (b) to get rid of old growth and make way for new growth to
attract more game; (c) to clear the ground and make it easier to see game tracks; and (d) to clear the ground
so that stepping on snakes is less of a risk.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2038

Table 2
Summary of some analytical parameters for the micromorphological analysis of combustion structures, based on Wattez (1992)
Low Intensity

Moderate Intensity

High Intensity

Plants

Browned with a reddened core, few
elements carbonized

Pseudocarbonized, carbonized elements and
ash equally frequent. Ash is brown to yellow

Carbonized, all remains carbonized and partially
mineralized. Ash is gray to white. Increased intensity
leads to crystalline calcinations (clotting) and fusion

Animal skin

Browned-black, semi-carbonized

Black, total carbonization of fibers

Gray-beige

Coprolites

Orange

Yellow

Gray-beige

Sedimentary
substrate

Only organics transform

Fissures in siltyeclayey aggregates, minerals
start to fragment, organics carbonized. Clays
browned with masked birefringence

Granular microstructure, amorphous ferruginous
particles turn orange-red, clays pigmented by
brown-red speckles, organics carbonized-calcined.
Increased intensity leads to microfragmentation and
uniform color (red if oxidating; black if reducing)
due to the destruction of clays

Combustion
structure

TOP-browned-carbonized organics
CENTER-slight alteration

TOP-carbonized organics and yellow-gray ash
CENTER-carbonized-calcined organics,
fragmented matrix
BASE-no changes

TOP-gray-white ash
CENTER-strong, deeper effects

BASE-no changes

BASE-same as center

Burning intensity depends on temperature, time of combustion, degree of oxygenation and the nature of the combustible (e.g. dry, wet and dead wood). However,
thresholds are mainly dependent on temperature, where <300  C, low intensity; 350e450  C, moderate intensity; and >500  C, high intensity.

3. Results
3.1. The impala burning fire (sample 1)
3.1.1. Field observations: A fire near the kill site of an impala
A 20-year-old man killed an impala on August 27, 2004
and dragged it about 80e100 m uphill from where it died.
He came back to camp and at 9:15, six other Hadza, plus
two researchers accompanied him to butcher the impala. Several branches were collected from nearby and placed on the
ground in sandy, rocky soil on top of a hill. The fire was burning for a short time with flames rising up to 1e1.5 m, but
quickly died down. Pieces of meat (rectum, ribs, liver and
large intestine) were placed in the fire and cooked for about
20 min (10:30 to 10:50). The hunter continued to butcher
the impala with the help of two young boys, and the pieces
of meat were moved 9 m to where they were added to the
big bonfire. The fire was sampled on September 5, 2004 (9
days later).

On the surface, the burning event left a circular blackened
area (60 cm in diameter) with gray ashes in its center (Fig. 1a).
The cross-section at the sampled area displayed a horizontal
sequence that was deepest and most clear in the middle of
the fire, becoming diffuse towards the edges. The sequence
comprised a thin layer of gray ashes at the top, followed by
8 cm of black sediments and 8 cm of reddened sediments at
the base (Fig. 1b).
3.1.2. Micromorphological observations
Results were obtained from one thin section (7 cm) corresponding with the top half of the combustion structure. The
top centimeter comprises a dark gray substrate (dark reddish
brown in thin section) of very sandy clays. The groundmass is
crumbly, with masked birefringence in the top half. This masked
birefringence is due to the presence of abundant charred fine organic material, most prevalent in the top centimeter of the substrate (Fig. 2a). Among the burnt materials there are abundant
animal residues, as well as pseudocarbonized wood and

Table 3
Summary of ethnographic data from the Hadza fires
Sample

Description
Fuel

Burning environment
(reducing/oxidizing)

Burning intensity (as a function of time,
temperature and degree of oxygenation)

Function

Age (from time of
abandonment to time
of sampling)

1

Dry wood-sticks and logs

Open air

Bonfire burning for 20 min, low intensity

10-days-old

2

Dry wood-sticks and logs

Open air

3, 4

Dry wood-sticks

5

Dry wood-sticks and
small logs
Dry wood-sticks and logs

At the entrance
of a hut
Open air

Continuous burning at high temperatures,
every day, for 4 months, moderate-high
intensity
Continuous burning at low temperatures,
every day, for 4 months, moderate intensity
Bonfire burning for 15 min, low intensity

Burning of meat
(a butchered impala)
Family cooking hearth

6

Open air

Continuous burning at high temperatures,
every day, for 2 months, high intensity

Family sleeping hearth
(for warmth)
Brief bonfire for
roasting tubers
Communal cooking
hearth

1-year-old

1-year-old
1-day-old
2-months-old

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2039

Table 4
Summary of micromorphological observations from the Hadza combustion structures
Sample

1

2

3

Description
Organic components

Sedimentary substrate

Taphonomic signature/
postdepositional effects

0e1 cm: Dense red/orange nodules (100e150 mm);
black amorphous impregnations and coatings;
pseudocarbonized wood (ash and black tissue),
rounded wood ash bundles (300 mm) and angular
charcoal fragments
2e4 cm: Charred rootlets and angular and rounded
charcoal fragments
5e7 cm: Browned rootlets and scattered angular
and rounded charcoal fragments
0e1 cm: Angular and rounded charcoal fragments
and punctuations
2e7 cm: Rounded, scattered charcoal fragments
and punctuations
0e1 cm: Gray-crystalline wood ash, including
carbonized and calcitic cells in anatomical position,
angular charcoal fragments, pale yellow/isotropic
impregnations and nodules, dense red nodules
1e2 cm: Charred plant fragments, isolated carbonized
cells and roots. Angular and rounded charcoal fragments

Top half: Crumbly, 40% complex packing voids; 20%
sand; 2% gravel. Masked birefringence

None

2e6 cm: Browned and unburnt plant tissue and rootlets,
scattered angular and rounded charcoal fragments
4

Same as sample 3; 2e4 cm: Rounded charcoal
fragments and fresh rootlets in a sandy lens

5

0.5e0.8 cm: Isolated calcitic crystals of wood ash and
a few wood ash bundles, abundant browned and black
plant tissue and few angular charcoal fragments
1e6 cm: Loose area- isolated calcitic crystals of wood
ash and a few wood ash bundles, abundant browned-black
plant tissue, few angular and rounded charcoal fragments;
Rounded aggregates- scattered rounded charcoal fragments
and rare charred tissue
0e7 cm: Grey to white crystalline ash with pseudocarbonized
wood tissue, dense pale yellow isotropic grains, and charred
animal tissue. At the base (0 cm), carbonized and
pseudocarbonized plant tissue, pale crystallitic and
blackegray crystallitic ash, pale yellow isotropic grains,
dense red nodules and animal tissue
0e8 cm: Browned-black amorphous organic fine material,
a charred rootlet at base

6

8e12 cm: Scattered rounded charcoal fragments and isolated
larger fragments, browned rootlets and pale yellow isotropic
grains

charcoal fragments (50 microns in size). Very rare traces of ash
were found, present as small (150 microns in size) rounded bundles of calcitic ash crystals scattered throughout the top centimeter of the burnt substrate (Fig. 2b). As one goes down in

Bottom half: Crumbly, 40% complex packing voids;
20% moderately sorted sand; 20% gravel. Speckled
b-fabrics
Crumbly, 40% complex packing voids, moderately
well-sorted 30% sand with thin clay coatings, 5%
gravel. Speckled b-fabrics, weakly granostriated

Frequent channels and
fresh rootlets

0e1 cm: Platy, 20% fissures and compound packing
voids, 20% sand with thin clay coatings, very few
0.5 mm subrounded soil rip-ups. Calciticecrystallitic

Artificial compaction
and frequent fresh
rootlets

1e2 cm: Massive, 20% vughs and channels, 40%
sand, 5% gravel. Mosaic of dark (masked
birefringence) and weakly granostriated patches
2e6 cm: Massive, 40% vughs and channels, 40%
sand, 5% gravel. Speckled, weakly granostriated
b-fabrics
0e1 cm: Crumbly, 20% vughs and compound
packing voids, 20% sand with thin clay coatings,
very few soil rip-ups. Calciticecrystallitic
1e2 cm: Massive, 20% compound packing voids,
vughs and channels, 40% sand, 5% gravel. Mosaic
of dark (masked birefringence) and weakly
granostriated patches
2e4 cm: Horizontal lens of packed sand
4e6 cm: Massive, 20% compound packing voids,
vughs and channels, 40% sand, 5% gravel. Speckled,
weakly granostriated b-fabrics
0.5e0.8 cm: Crumbly, 50% complex and compound
packing voids, 20% sand, 5% gravel

Frequent fresh rootlets

None

0e6 cm: Loose areas e same as above; Rounded
aggregates (2e3 cm) e 40% vughs and complex and
compound packing voids, 30% sand, weakly speckled
matrix with masked birefringence
0e7 cm: Massive, 10% vughs, fissures and channels,
2% sand. Mosaic grayewhiteepale brown calcitic
crystallitic, few subrounded reddened soil rip-ups
0e1 cm: Crumbly, 40% vughs and complex and
compound packing voids, 20% sand. Isolated claycoated grains and reddened speckled clay aggregates
1e8 cm: Crumbly-granular, 40% vughs and complex
and compound packing voids, 30% sand, 20% gravel.
Masked birefringence
8e12 cm: Crumbly-granular, 40% vughs and complex
and compound packing voids, 30% sand, 20% gravel.
Speckled b-fabrics

None

the profile, there are charred rootlets from 2e4 cm, and below
this point they are browned, and the charcoal fragments are generally smaller and more scattered in the groundmass (Fig. 2c).
A very small portion of the reddened layer observed in the field

2040

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 1. Impala burning fire. Plan view (a) and cross-section indicating the location of the micromorphology sample (b).

at the base of the fire was captured in the thin section, and it has
the appearance of a natural soil (Fig. 2d).
3.2. Open air cooking fire by a hut (sample 2)
3.2.1. Field observations
This was a cooking fire in a camp that had been occupied in
the previous years and then abandoned. It was the main cooking fire, about 17 m from the house. It had been occupied from
JulyeOctober 2003 and was the only fire for cooking everyday
during that period. It was excavated 1 year later, on September
5, 2004.
After a year of abandonment, the four boulders that marked
the contour of the hearth were found in place and served as
landmarks (Fig. 3a, b). They enclosed a small area of about
60 cm in diameter. Only a few shades of gray were left on
the crumbly surface, and the cross-section showed a homogenous appearance with abundant fresh roots (Fig. 3c).
3.2.2. Micromorphological observations
Results were obtained from one thin section (7 cm) representing the top portion of the combustion structure, although
the contact with the ground surface was lost during sample processing. Throughout its length, the substrate shows a loose,
moderately well-sorted dark gray (reddish brown in thin section)
sandy clayey deposit with thin iron-rich clay coatings around the
grains and common charcoal fragments, speckles and punctuations (25 microns in size). The larger charcoal fragments
(125 mm) range from fresh to rounded and are found predominantly at the top of the substrate (Fig. 4a). The base of the sample
shows less and more scattered charcoal fragments (Fig. 4b). The

groundmass shows properties typical of a natural soil (Fig. 4c).
No traces of ash were identified, nor distinctive burnt organic
material found, besides the small charcoal speckles, although
the clays in the top portion of the sample display a more dusty
appearance from the presence of organic punctuations. The substrate appears to have been recently invaded by rootlets e which
are fresh and frequent throughout the sample.
3.3. Sleeping fire inside the same hut (samples 3 and 4)
3.3.1. Field observations
This was the sleeping fire inside a hut where a couple had
lived from JulyeOctober, 2003 (sample 2 was the cooking fire
that was used by this couple). This fire was for keeping warm at
night and so would have been going almost continuously, or at
least revived every night, for about 4 months. It was located
at the entrance of the hut.
The fire was sampled 1 year after inactivity. It was found
under a light cover of dry grass, partly belonging to the abandoned hut (Fig. 5). In cross-section, its appearance was homogeneous and invaded by roots, similar to sample 2, with a very
thin gray layer of ash at the top.
3.3.2. Micromorphological observations
The combustion structure was sampled twice; hence we
have two thin sections (3 and 4.7 cm long) representing a single location. Taking together both samples, we observed that
the combustion structure is made up of a massive layer of
gray ash (light gray in thin section), 1 cm thick, resting on
a burnt dark grayish brown substrate (brown/reddish brown
in thin section) of sandy clays. The ash is composed of

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2041

Fig. 2. Impala burning fire. Note that ash (b) is present only as reworked bundles of calcitic crystals or partly calcified wood within the top centimeter of the burnt
substrate, which comprises high concentrations of browned organic matter and charcoal fragments (a). The sediments below exhibit very weak traces of burning,
mainly scattered charcoal fragments and browned rootlets (c) and the base of the combustion structure e reddened to the naked eye e shows birefringence and
microstructure proper of a natural soil (d). 1a and 1c viewed in PPL; b and d viewed in XPL.

calcified wood and leaf cells mixed with charcoal fragments,
pseudocarbonized plant tissue, and few dense nodules possibly
representing animal residues (Fig. 6a). One phosphatic inclusion was identified as a coprolite. Very few mineral grains,
with thin iron-rich clay coatings around them are found floating in the ashy groundmass, as well as rare brown soil aggregates ripped-up from the underlying substrate (Fig. 6b). The
top centimeter of the burnt substrate contains abundant
browned to carbonized organic particles including plant cells,
charcoal speckles and a few whole rootlets (Fig. 6c). The
groundmass shows a mosaic birefringence pattern with darker
(organic-rich) zones (Fig. 6e) and brighter ones. The porosity
in this subsurface portion is composed of large vughs and
channels, and these become more abundant with increasing
depth. Below 1 cm, the organic fraction, which is the same
as above, is only partly burnt or browned, and the charcoal

fragments appear both fresh and reworked (rounded)
(Fig. 6d). The birefringence fabric of the clayey groundmass
below 1 cm is more distinct and homogeneous (Fig. 6f). The
state of preservation of this hearth is excellent, as shown by
the undisturbed position of the plant cells in the ash. Nevertheless, the presence of fresh rootlets throughout the sample, including through the ash layer, indicates recent bioturbation.
One of the samples from this sleeping fire (sample 3) was
slightly compressed in the extraction process and this is reflected in the microstructure of the ash layer, which is platy
and fissured horizontally. An overall assessment of samples 3
and 4, taking the artificial compression into account, reveals
that the substrate of this combustion structure is made up of
compacted sandy clays, more compacted and more sandy
than the outdoor cooking fire (sample 2). Towards the top of
the burnt substrate, sample 4 displays a thin, well-sorted

2042

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 3. Open air cooking fire. General context (a), plan view (b) and cross-section with the location of the micromorphological sample (c).

Fig. 4. Open air cooking fire by a hut. The only traces of fire left are reworked fragments of charcoal, scattered throughout the matrix (a, b), which shows a high
birefringence in a speckled groundmass (c). a and b viewed in PPL; c in XPL.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2043

Fig. 5. Sleeping fire inside a hut. General context with red circle indicating the location of the fire (a), plan view (b) and cross-section with location of the
micromorphology samples (c).

horizontal lens of fine sand and silt (w1 mm) with distinct upper and lower boundaries (Fig. 7a and 7b). It has been invaded
by fresh rootlets and contains reworked charcoal fragments derived from the combustion structure. Although well-sorted sand
lenses of this kind could result from root bioturbation, based on
the absence of such features in other bioturbated samples (e.g.
samples 2 and 3), as well as from the sharpness of its contact
with the underlying soil, we interpret this particular one as residual evidence (recently disturbed by roots) for the existence
of a loose sandy ground surface associated with the area of
the hut.
3.4. A tuber roasting fire (sample 5)
3.4.1. Field observations
On September 5, 2004 several women and children walked
just out of camp and built a bonfire from nearby limbs and

then placed their //ekwa tubers on the flames, occasionally
turning them over and roasting each for 5e10 min. The flames
continued for about 8 min. The sample was taken on September 6, 2004, while the sediments were still moist after a heavy
rain.
Similar to the other fires described in this paper, this fire
displayed a circular shape of about 60 cm in diameter, and
in cross-section, it was composed of a thin layer of light
gray ash on the surface, followed by a thin (2 cm) black layer
of burnt sediments directly on top of the natural soil (Fig. 8).
3.4.2. Micromorphological observations
Results were obtained from one thin section (7 cm) corresponding to a horizontal cross-section of the combustion structure at the level of the black burnt sediment layer (2 cm down
the profile; see Fig. 8c). At this level, the substrate is comprised of aggregated dark gray/grayish brown sandy clays

2044

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 6. Sleeping fire inside a hut. Note the presence of a well preserved layer of ash containing calcified and pseudocarbonized wood and isolated grains with
oxidized clay coatings (a). The contact with the substrate is sharp, with small rip-ups incorporated in the ash (b) and the top centimeter of sediments contains
abundant charred organic material (c) that has masked the original birefringence of the groundmass (e). At the base, the proportion of organics decreases, the
charcoal fragments are smaller in size (d), and the birefringence and general appearance of the matrix is that of a natural soil (f). a, c and d viewed in PPL;
b, e and f in XPL.

(dark reddish brown/reddish brown in thin section), weakly
speckled, and browned by the presence of charcoal and partially carbonized plant tissue and cells. Several rounded and
subrounded aggregates of desiccated burnt sediments

(Fig. 9a) were identified, surrounded by loose sediments comprising isolated calcitic ash bundles (Fig. 9b) together with
well-sorted crumbs of browned and carbonized organic material, and silt-sized mineral grains and crystals of calcitic wood

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2045

Fig. 7. Buried lens of sand possibly representing a residual former ground surface in the area of the hut prior to the fire. Views in PPL.

ash (Fig. 9c). The rounded aggregates are oxidized, fissured in
a way that suggests desiccation, and contain abundant carbonized organic material and calcitic crystals (Fig. 9d). These possibly represent undisturbed and ripped-up parts of the burnt
substrate. They show a high birefringence (Fig. 9e), frequent
vughs and vesicles, and abundant browned and carbonized organic matter.

3.5. Open air communal cooking fire (samples 6a, 6b
and 6c)
3.5.1. Field observations
House cooking fire in a contemporary camp that was occupied at the time of sampling. This hearth was shared by two
households and used as a cooking fire. However, they had
been using it a few months before the time of excavation on
September 6, 2004 even though they were still in the same
camp but using a new fire at new houses in slightly different
locations. This fire was revived a couple of times every day
for cooking. It was periodically maintained by scooping out
the top ashy layer, often deep enough to affect the underlying
burnt soil. Remains and ashes from the last use of the fire before its abandonment were left in place (note the top layer of
ashes in Fig. 10a, containing small bone fragments and other
debris). This portion of the hearth was not sampled. The exposed cross-section displayed a light gray ash lens underlain
by a concave black layer grading downwards into brown and
light brown (Fig. 10c). At the sampled spot, the interface between the ash and the burnt substrate was red (Fig. 10c).

3.5.2. Micromorphological observations
Results were obtained from three consecutive thin sections
representing the entire depth of the combustion structure
(20 cm). The top 7 cm sampled comprise a weakly fissured,
channeled layer of white/light gray ash. In thin section, we
can see a mosaic of gray, white, and pale yellow calcitic plant
cells and tissue (Fig. 11a). The composition and microstructure of the ash layer is homogeneous from top to bottom,
and includes a mix of carbonized and partly carbonized fragments of plant tissue and cells, unidentified phosphatic particles and few possible animal residues. Mineral grains are
rare, cracked and etched, as well as a few reddened soil ripups and elongated clayey remnants. Some of these clayey intercalations are often found still attached to plant skeletons,
suggesting that they belong to the original soil substrate of
the burnt plant (Fig. 11b).
At the contact with the substrate, there are isolated, thinly
iron-rich clay-coated sand grains and few reworked browned
soil aggregates in a very loose microstructure (Fig. 11c, f). Below this and up to 8 cm deep, the burnt substrate is loose, granular, composed of dark gray (reddish brown in thin section),
organic-rich sandy clays (Fig. 11d) with a masked birefringence. The organic material is fine, amorphous, and either
browned or carbonized. Charred rootlets were identified at
around 7 cm beneath the substrate’s surface, and vughs, vesicles and channels are common throughout this depth. The bottom portion of the combustion structure (8e12 cm beneath the
substrate’s surface) is crumbly, with abundant small charcoal
fragments and punctuations, very few isolated carbonized
plant tissue fragments and common reddened rootlets

2046

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 8. Tuber roasting fire. General view (a), plan view (b) and cross-section (c).

(Fig. 11e). The groundmass in this portion is highly birefringent and speckled (Fig. 11g). The rootlets and the channels
that prevail throughout the three samples suggest that bioturbation by roots took place prior to the burning event.
4. Discussion
Using the analytical parameters established by Wattez
(1992), we were able to determine the micromorphological
signature of anthropogenic fire in all the samples, and the degree of burning intensity in all but sample 2, the 1-year-old
open air cooking fire. The use of wood as a fuel was evident

micromorphologically. Remnants of burnt wood are found in
the ashes (where ashes were present), as well as in the top centimeter of the burnt substrates. In the worst preserved sample
(the 1-year-old cooking hearth) the burnt particles do not exhibit any clear morphology, and the only information that
could be obtained was that the fuel possibly included wood.
Anthracological analysis of the charcoal remains would be
able to provide further detailed information including the
taxa, the anatomical parts used, and whether the wood was
wet, dry or dead. For all of the samples, the absence of phytoliths suggests that grass was minimally used as fuel. From the
ethnographic account we know that small amounts of grass

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2047

Fig. 9. Tuber roasting fire. The sample captures a planar view of the top centimeters of the combustion structure. Note the loose, crumbly microstructure of the
burnt substrate in the area outside of the dashed lines, comprising charred organic material and reworked soil rip-ups (a), rounded bundles of clacitic ash (b) and
isolated crystals of calcitic ash mixed with fine organic particles (c). The undisturbed portions of the burnt substrate e encircled by dashed lines e comprise reddened sediments with charcoal fragments (d) and show a high birefringence (e). Views in PPL except c and e (XPL).

were used to start the fire. The use of grass to start fires, together with the light grass cover on the ground and a few scattered dry leaves, would amount to a very low proportion of
phytoliths in the ash layer and top centimeter of the samples,
which we could identify through phytolith analyses.
These results from a small number of samples provide data
for a discussion of the preservation potential of open air and
semi-sheltered anthropogenic combustion structures and our
ability to reconstruct their function and histories.
4.1. Preservation potential of open air and
semi-sheltered combustion structures
In sample 1, we had the opportunity to observe the sedimentary effects of an ephemeral surface burning event. Although the ash layer disappeared after only 10 days in the

open air, burning directly on the ground for 20 min had nonreversible effects on the substrate which, given rapid sedimentation and geochemical stability, could be preserved over time.
The main marker features are: a reddened (oxidized) clayey
groundmass, microstructural disaggregation enhanced by
burning of the organic fraction, the presence of charred organic matter including plant and animal residues, and isolated,
reworked bundles of calcitic ash. Following Wattez’s parameters, these are the features indicative of a burning event of
moderate intensity. However, the observations from sample 2
may serve to address the influence of taphonomic effects. After 1 year of abandonment in a relatively acidic substrate in the
open air, with no sedimentary accretion and under the effects
of bioturbation by roots, the remnants of a cooking hearth that
burnt continuously for 4 months were limited to an oxidized
clayey groundmass with isolated charcoal speckles. No traces

2048

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 10. Open air communal cooking fire. General context (a), plan view (b) and cross-section with the location of the micromorphological sample (c).

of reworked ash or of burnt organic tissue were left in the preserved substrate. In this case, the effects of taphonomic agents
destroyed the original combustion structure and the only remaining traces of the burning event were few carbonized organics in a reddened substrate.
Contrary to this situation, the sleeping hearth (samples 3
and 4) shows very good states of preservation and indications
of a burning event of moderate intensity: 1 cm of gray ash is
present, as well as 1 cm of organic-rich burnt substrate and
an underlying reddened groundmass speckled by charcoal.
The thin layer of dry grass (from the collapsing hut) that covered the abandoned fire protected it from the erosional impact

of wind and rainfall of that year. The sleeping fire documented
a similar degree of root bioturbation to that observed in the
outdoor cooking fire (sample 2), yet its original microstratigraphic structure was preserved. This suggests that erosion
played a stronger role than invasion by roots in the preservation of both of these combustion structures.
Sample 6 represents an outdoor hearth that had been used 2
months prior to excavation. It yielded 7 cm of light gray ash
and a 12 cm deep burnt substrate. Similar to samples 3 and
4, its good preservation allowed us to detect certain microstratigraphic features related to the function and history of this
cooking fire. After 2 months, root bioturbation had not yet

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

2049

Fig. 11. Open air communal cooking fire. The ashes made up of a gray-light gray mosaic of calcitic wood cells and pseudocarbonized fragments, as well as burnt
sediment rip-ups (a, detail in h, i) and residual clay intercalations (b). The top centimeter of the burnt substrate comprises reddened clays lacking charred organics
(c, f), underlain by burnt sediment with a high concentration of organics (d). The sediments at the base of the combustion structure have the appearance of a natural
soil (e, g). b, c, d and e viewed in PPL; a, f, g, h and i in XPL.

occurred. Sufficient diagnostic features were preserved to classify the sample as an anthropogenic combustion structure of
high intensity. The distinction between moderate (e.g. the
sleeping hearth) and high (this fire) was mainly observed in

the degree of carbonization and calcination of the ash components, the coloration of the ash layer, and the microstructure of
the underlying burnt substrate, which was weakly aggregated
in the sleeping hearth and granular in sample 5.

2050

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Fig. 11 (continued)

Micromorphological results suggest that the anthropogenic
signature of open air combustion structures can be detected
depending on the rates of sedimentation and the impact of
postdepositional disturbance factors such as root invasion. If
the rates of sedimentation are low, leading to erosion, the remains of an ephemeral open air fire are likely to disappear.
Long-duration fires might be identifiable as anthropogenic
fires, but not interpreted any further. In cases where the rates
of sedimentation are high or the combustion structure is buried
and hence protected from erosion, even if root invasion has
played a role, open air fires can be successfully interpreted
through soil micromorphology.
4.2. Function
If the features observed micromorphologically had been
found in an archaeological context, would it have been possible to reconstruct the function and history of any of these
fires? From ethnographic accounts we know that there are
clear functional distinctions among the fires sampled, but
soil micromorphology yielded little information on this regard.
The sample of the impala burning fire yielded few, scattered
animal residues e possibly grease, hemoglobin and organic
fluidse and their preservation potential is questionable. They
were found in the very top of the burnt substrate, mixed in
with the charred organics, and could easily go undetected in
an archaeological context. Nevertheless, we must note that
the anthropogenic incorporation of organics into the top of
the substrate, such as in the cases of the impala and tuber
roasting fire, yielded higher amounts of microscopic organic

matter in comparison with the other samples. We might consider this factor (the presence of high amounts of organic matter) in the comparative study of synchronous combustion
structures in archeological sites where the potential for the
preservation of burnt organic matter is high, such as Abric
Romanı́, Spain (Pastó et al., 2000) and Kebara, Israel (Meignen
et al., 1989).
From ethnographic observations we know that Hadza cooking fires were commonly used to roast and boil meat, roast
tubers, boil berries, and when they happen to get some maize
through trade, boil maize porridge. We analyzed two different
cooking hearths (samples 2 and 6) and neither provided elements diagnostic of the activity of cooking except for isolated
particles possibly representing burnt seeds and animal residues. The ashes contained abundant burnt plant fuel remains.
Anthracological and phytolith analyses could possibly distinguish plant species, particularly in a case such as the tuber
roasting fire, where the charred tissue is incorporated into
the top of the combustion structure leaving abundant cmand mm-sized remains. The clearest proof that function is difficult to determine is the similarity in composition between the
cooking and sleeping fires. The differences in the nature and
amount of charred organic particles within the black layer of
both types of hearths were not diagnostic. The pre-existence
of a trampled surface in the sleeping fire is not directly representative of a particular function, although it can be considered
as indicative of a habitation site. The only micromorphological
difference between samples 3, 4 (sleeping fire) and 6 (cooking
fire) that could be diagnostic of function is the degree of burning intensity of the combustion structure.

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Sample 6, the cooking fire left a stronger impact in 2
months than the sleeping fire in four. Its ashes were white
and the burning effects on the substrate, deeper, all indicative
of a higher intensity in comparison to the gray, shallow structure of samples 3 and 4. This evidence corresponds to the ethnographic observation that sleeping fires are kept burning at
low intensities in order to avoid fire hazards in the vicinity
of the hut. Further confirmation of this point could be provided
by anthracological analysis of the charcoal fraction, which
would be able to distinguish between fragments of large
wooden logs (used for high intensity cooking fires) vs. small
twigs and sticks (used in sleeping hearths).
The function of combustion structures is difficult to determine based on soil micromorphology. The technique yielded
only two parameters that may serve as possible indicators of
function: (1) the amount of organic matter, which if high
may be associated with roasting; and (2) the burning intensity,
which has shown to be high in cooking fires and low in sleeping fires. There are other types of fire that the Hadza make that
we did not sample, such as surface grass fires to light torches,
ephemeral cigarette lighting fires, hunting bonfires, wooden
artifact tending fires, and extensive grass fires. Based on our
preliminary results, the anthropogenic signature in these types
will also be weak and indistinct from one to the other, although the grass fires could be characterized from their lack
of wood ash and from the presence of phytoliths.
4.3. Fire histories
Our preliminary study has contributed two findings in this
regard. The first comprises features indicative of a compact
surface on which people possibly slept prior to the time of
building the sleeping fire (samples 3 and 4). This observation
is relevant for evaluating the different impact of Hadza activities on the sediments throughout the camp, and might suggest
that the area surrounding the hut was more intensively used
than the areas where the other fires were made. However,
we derive this preliminary interpretation from a single finding,
and systematic sampling of ethnographically documented
areas is necessary to clarify this issue.
The second finding, in sample 6, shows indications of the
scooping out of ashes for the maintenance of a cooking fire.
To the naked eye, the concave outline of the contact between
the ash layer and the underlying blackened sediment suggests
that the fire was built on a slightly hollowed out substrate. The
microstratigraphy of sample 6 includes a layer of ash underlain by approximately 1 cm of crumbly reddened sediment
lacking a significant amount of organics. Instead, the density
of burnt organics is apparent only approximately 2 cm down
the substrate. This suggests that the reddened sediment directly beneath the ashes does not belong to the same substrate.
Moreover, reworked reddened soil clasts were found within
the ashes, possibly ripped out of the substrate during the
scooping activity.
The two cases illustrate the high potential of soil micromorphology to reconstruct the history of combustion structures. In
the future, micromorphological analysis should focus on

2051

Hadza fires that have served different functions in order to
approach this problematic factor in more depth.
5. Conclusions
This study attempted to document sedimentary signatures
of human-made fires that could be applied to the archaeological record. It represents the first steps of an ethno-geoarchaeological investigation aimed at obtaining independent evidence
to test micromorphological interpretations. Such an approach
comes in a time when there is increasing archaeological interest in pyrotechnology and when prehistoric excavations can
provide high resolution multidisciplinary data on combustion
structures. Thanks to the benefit of a feedback between the
ethnographic context and its microscopic representation, it
was possible to assess what questions we can answer faced
to the sedimentary remains of an anthropogenic fire.
It was shown that soil micromorphology has the potential
to: (1) distinguish between natural and anthropogenic fire,
(2) to estimate the burning intensity of combustion structures
and in some instances, and (3) to identify the type of fuel
used. In addition, this study provided insight into three main
aspects of combustion structures relevant to archaeology: their
preservation potential, the interpretation of their function, and
the reconstruction of their use histories. For any given prehistoric site, coupling this kind of information on fire features
with associated archaeological evidence can highly contribute
to our understanding of other aspects of collective behavior
such as spatial organization, site use and site duration.
This preliminary study needs to be complemented by a larger
collection of samples, including samples of Hadza grass fires,
natural fires documented in Hadzaland in the recent past and
unburnt control samples. Anthracological and phytolith analyses should be incorporated into the study, as they provide
important data to support micromorphological observations.
Acknowledgements
This investigation is funded by NSF grant # 0242455 to
Frank Marlowe. We would like to thank Prof. Paul Goldberg,
who provided comments on the micromorphological work,
and Prof. Ofer Bar-Yosef, who sparked this study on fires.
References
Barbetti, M., 1986. Traces of fire in the archaeological record before one million years ago? Journal of Human Evolution 15, 771e781.
Bellomo, R., 1991. Identifying traces of natural and humanly-controlled fire in
the archaeological record: the role of actualistic studies. Archaeology in
Montana 32, 75e92.
Bellomo, R., 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological
evidence of fire resulting from human activities. Journal of Archaeological
Science 20, 525e554.
Courty, M.A., Goldberg, P., Macphail, R.I. (Eds.), 1989. Soil Micromorphology in Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., 2001. Site formation processes at
Zhoukoudian, China. Journal of Human Evolution 41 (5), 483e530.
Goldberg, P., Whitebread, I., 1993. Micromorphological studies of a Bedouin
tent floor. In: Goldberg, P., Nash, D.T., Petraglia, M. (Eds.), Formation

2052

C. Mallol et al. / Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (2007) 2035e2052

Processes in Context. Monographs in World Archaeology, vol. 17. Prehistory Press, pp. 165e188.
James, S.R., 1989. Hominid use of fire in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene.
A review of the evidence. Current Anthropology 30, 1e26.
James, S.R., 1996. Early hominid use of fire: recent approaches and methods
for evaluation of the evidence. In: Bar-Yosef, O., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L.,
March, R.J., Piperno, M. (Eds.), The Lower and Middle Palaeolithic.
vol. 5. A.B.A.C.O Edizioni, Forli, pp. 65e75.
Karkanas, P., Rigaud, J.P., Simek, J.F., Albert, R.M., Weiner, S., 2002. Ash, bones
and guano. A study of the minerals and phytoliths in the sediments of Grotte
XVI, Dordogne, France. Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 721e732.
Macphail, R., Cruise, G.M., Allen, M.J., Linderholm, J., Reynolds, P., 2004.
Archaeological soil and pollen analysis of experimental floor deposits;
with special reference to Butser Ancient Farm, Hampshire, UK. Journal
of Archaeological Science 31, 175e191.
Marlowe, F.W., 2002. Why the Hadza are still hunter-gatherers. In: Kent, S.
(Ed.), Ethnicity, Hunter-Gatherers and the ‘‘Other’’: Association or Assimilation in Africa. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington DC, pp. 247e275.
Marlowe, F.W., 2003. A critical period for provisioning for Hadza men: implications for pair bonding. Evolution and Human Behavior 24, 217e229.
Marlowe, F.W., 2004. What explains Hadza food sharing? Research in Economic Anthropology 23, 69e88.
Meignen, L., Bar Yosef, O., Goldberg, P., Weiner, S., 2001. Le feu au Paléolithique moyen: recherches sur les structures de combustion et le statut des
foyers. L’exemple du Proche-Orient. Paleorient 26, 9e22.
Meignen, L., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 1989. Structures de combustion
mousteriennes de la grotte de Kebara (Mont Carmel, Israel). Nature et
fonction des foyers prehistoriques 2.
Pastó, I., Allué, E., Vallverdú, J., 2000. Mousterian Hearths at Arbic Romanı́,
Catalonia (Spain). In: Stringer, C.B., Barton, R., Finlayson, J.C. (Eds.),
Neanderthals on the Edge. Oxbow N.E.B Books, Oxford, pp. 59e67.
Rudner, E.Z., Sumegi, P., 2002. Charcoal as a remain of natural and human-set
fires of Palaeolithic times e case study from Hungary. In: Fire in Archaeology. BAR International Series, vol. 1089, pp. 11e18.

Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., Weiner, S., 1996. Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara Caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological implications. Journal of
Archaeological Science 23, 763e781.
Schiegl, S., Goldberg, P., Pfretzschner, H.-U., Conard, N., 2003. Paleolithic
Burn Bone Horizons from the Swabian Jura: distinguishing between in
situ fireplaces and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology 18 (5), 541e565.
Schiegl, S., Stockhammer, P., Scott, C., Wadley, L., 2004. A mineralogical
and phytolith study of the Middle Stone Age hearths in Sibudu Cave,
Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100,
185e194.
Stiner, M.C., Weiner, S., Bar-Yosef, O., Kuhn, S.L., 1995. Differential burning,
recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. Journal of
Archaeological Science 22 (2).
Stoops, G., 2003. Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith
Thin Sections. Soil Science Society of America, Inc., Madison,
Winsconsin.
Vallverdú, J., 2001. Micromorfologia de las facies sedimentarias de la Sierra
de Atapuerca y del nivel J del Abric Romani. Implicaciones geoarqueológicas y paleoetnograficas. Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona.
Vaquero, M., Pastó, I., 2001. The definition of spatial units in Middle Palaeolithic Sites: the hearth-related assemblages. Journal of Archaeological
Science 28, 1209e1220.
Wattez, J., 1992. Dynamique de formation des structures de combustion de la
fin du Paléolithique au Néolithique moyen. Université de Paris I, Paris.
Weiner, S., Goldberg, P., Bar-Yosef, O., 2002. Three-dimensional distribution
of minerals in the sediments of Hayonim Cave, Israel: diagenetic processes
and archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 29,
1289e1308.
Weiner, S., Qinqi, X., Goldberg, P., Liu, J., Bar-Yosef, O., 10 July 1998.
Evidence for the use of fire at Zhoukoudian, China. Science 281,
251e253.
Wood, B., 2006. Prestige or provisioning? A test of foraging goals among the
Hadza. Current Anthropology 47 (2), 383e387.

