Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, 2009

443

“We Drew What We Imagined”
Participatory Mapping, Performance, and the Arts of Landscape Making
by Bjørn Ingmunn Sletto
Participatory mapping has emerged as a dominant paradigm in participatory approaches to international planning, conservation management, and community development in the Global South and
is considered a technology with emancipatory potentials for subordinate or marginalized groups.
However, the literature on community-based mapping has been criticized for its dualistic approach
to power, culture, and the local and for reifying material and discursive forms of domination operating
through Western projects such as development and global environmentalism. An ethnographic engagement with mapping projects conducted in Trinidad in the fall of 1998 and in Venezuela from
2001–2004 provides a deeper understanding of participatory-mapping workshops as theaters for the
performance and negotiation of identities, reflecting the complex articulations between global,
political-economic processes and desires for place and belonging. Ultimately, this critical reading
indicates an urgent need for greater reflexivity in the application of participatory-mapping approaches.

What we drew on our map, was all we knew, to the limit
of our knowledge. We have drawn places we have heard
about but that I have never been to. I have never seen Rio
Arapopo. What we have put down is imaginary. But much
is missing still.
—Rosa Emilia Fernández
Rosa Emilia Fernández had a complex, unusual, and intimidating audience when she spoke these words in 2002. She
and two other women had spent the afternoon sketching a
map of what they understood (and desired) to be the territory
of Kumarakapay, an indigenous Pemon village in the Gran
Sabana, in far southeastern Venezuela. Rosa Emilia, Leticia
Fernández (no close relation), and Cristina Rossi (Leticia’s
daughter) had never before drawn such a map without the
direction of elder men. They were now participating in a
workshop to map land uses and places with historic significance, in other words, doing the work typically considered
the right and responsibility of elder men. Leticia, Rosa Emilia,
and Cristina were alternatively bemused, insecure, and pleased
to take their place among the men to draw what Leticia at
one point called the women’s “own map.”
They were drawing their own map in part because I had
made an intrusive request a few days earlier. I was in Kumarakapay to assist with a project to map the lands of the
Bjørn Ingmunn Sletto is Assistant Professor in the School of Architecture at the University of Texas at Austin (1 University Station,
B7500, Austin, Texas 78712-0222, U.S.A. [bjornsletto@mail.utexas
.edu]). This paper was submitted 4 VI 06 and accepted 25 IX 08.

indigenous Pemon in sector 5, one of eight self-designated
sectors of the Pemon homeland. A few days before the workshop in Kumarakapay, I had suggested to the local coordinator
for the mapping project, Claudio Gómez, that the entire community be invited, that the participants be divided into groups
by age and gender, and that each group draw a map and
present it to all participants at the end of the day. I had made
the point to Gómez and his brother Juvencio, the village chief
(capitan) at the time, that if the mapping process incorporated
the vision and knowledge of both women and men, the final
territorial map would be more complete and rhetorically powerful, and it would thus better serve the goal of achieving
land rights for the Pemon. As would happen again on many
occasions, I had made a conscious, albeit uneasy, intervention
in the social life of the village. As a social scientist, I was
concerned about reproducing the essentializing dichotomy
between indigenous tradition and modernity; as an activist
scholar, I was aware that indigenous movements often obtain
more influence when they employ primitivist imagery (Haley
and Wilcoxon 1997, 764; Milton 1996; Ulloa 2005).
When Rosa Emilia presented the women’s map to her audience—the dozen or so teenagers, a handful of other women,
a half-dozen adult and elder men, and the white, male cartographer from abroad—her words were measured, almost
apologetic: the women had drawn places they had heard about
but never seen. Because vision and walking are privileged ways
of gaining knowledge among their people, the women felt
that their map was “incomplete.” As she explained to me
later, two of the village elders present, César Duran and Antonio Pérez, were abuelos (grandfathers) known for their ex-

䉷 2009 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2009/5004-0002$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/593704

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

444

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

ceptional knowledge of the farthest reaches of village territory.
Rosa Emilia believed that the women’s map failed to live up
to the standards of detail and accuracy she imagined were
reflected in the elders’ map. At the same time, she relished
the opportunity to present the women’s perspective on the
landscape in which she, Leticia, and Cristina had lived their
entire lives.
As I became friends with Rosa Emilia, Leticia, Cristina, and
their extended families over the course of the next four
years—playing my sometimes contradictory roles as researcher, cartographer, colleague, friend, teacher, rival, and
intruder—I kept returning to her words. I began to appreciate
the complexities of the “culture-making” taking place in the
mapping project: how the performances of project participants were structured by the presence of complex audiences
and complicated by a lack of clearly established rules of production and reception (Myers 1994). I began to realize that
“the map,” as it simply came to be known among Pemon in
the Gran Sabana, was contingent not only on knowledge of
the materiality of the landscape but also on the temporalities
and imaginaries that infuse it and give it meaning. The map
was the result of contested performances of people who in
different ways embody this landscape and (re)produce its
meanings; in so doing, they negotiate and reproduce what it
means to be Pemon and to rightfully belong. I came to understand that places existing only in someone’s imagination
also are constitutive of landscapes and contribute to forming
personal biographies (Tilley 1996). The map was not simply
a technical product of local and scientific knowledge but also
a work of art, embodying, reflecting, and acting on the social
as well as the material. Ultimately, I realized that the process
of making the map had been as important as the end product
for what it had revealed about the entanglements of identities,
social relations, landscape, and power in places on the margins.

Participatory Mapping, Performativity,
and Talking Landscapes
In this article, I wish to consider the roles of memory, performance, and embodiment in participatory mapping, in part
to draw attention to the negotiations of power, identities, and
authenticities implicated in community-based productions of
spatial representations. I draw primarily on my experiences
with the mapping project in Venezuela—and also with a
briefer project in Trinidad—to suggest that an ethnographic
consideration allows us to consider critically the notion of
participatory mapping as a counterhegemonic activity. First,
I reflect on the ways in which the processes of imagining,
talking about, and drawing landscapes shape and refract relations of power in multiple, complex, and sometimes contradictory ways, and second, I consider how these processes
ultimately reveal the ways in which neocolonial structures
shape places on the margins.
Drawing in part on insights from the anthropology of art,

performativity, and landscape (e.g., Geismar and Tilley 2003;
Gell 1998; Ingold 1993; Myers 1994; Okafor 1994; Rose 2000;
Stoller 1994a, 1994b, 1996, 2004; Taylor 2003; Tilley 1996;
Trigger and Mulcock 2005), I suggest that participatory map
production is intimately implicated in performances of the
past, the present, and often divergent, imagined futures. Focusing explicitly on process instead of form thus allows me
to foreground the embodied performances taking place in
mapping projects (see Ingold 1993 and Rundstrom 1990 for
early cultural interpretations of indigenous maps). I am speaking here of performances similar to those of Stoller’s West
Sahelian griots, who negotiate social life by “talking it” (Stoller
1994b, 357). In the case of drawing maps—and even talking
about and preparing to draw maps—these performances articulate desires and imaginations of what the map should look
like, should do, and will do, for maps are always made for a
purpose: they are the abstracted material representation of
landscapes as they (are seen to) have been, are, and could/
should be.
Unlike griots, however, performers in community mapping
workshops challenge each other for the right to “talk” the
past, the present, and the future, their authority derived in
part from the ways in which they embody space and time.
Performers become the rightful “owners” of the landscape
(Rose 2000, 289) based in part on their embodiment of the
landscape and on their relationship with the histories that are
embedded within it and thus define it. From the outset, then,
I assume that mapping is inextricably linked with questions
of rights and authority, not simply in binary terms of local
or indigenous versus nonlocal claims to land rights, resources,
and so on but also in terms of the negotiations of what constitute authentic readings of histories and futures. Through
these storytellings, authenticities and meanings of landscapes
are (re)defined, relations of power are negotiated, and ultimately, structures and processes of neocolonial control are
made visible. The stories informing and deriving from mapmaking thus provide frameworks for social and political assessment and agency (Taylor 2003); that is, if we view the
performances associated with participatory mapping as art,
then participatory mapping is implicitly and unavoidably action “intended to change the world rather than encode symbolic propositions about it” (Gell 1998, 6).
I should clarify what I mean by “performance” and “storytelling” in the context of mapmaking. I am not speaking
here of the ritualized telling of stories, such as elder Pemons’
carefully staged recitals of ancestral pantons, but rather conscious, competitive talking about landscape, time, and people
akin to Trinidadian “liming.” As Eriksen (1990) explains, liming is best understood as a semiformal activity constituted by
relationships between the performers, who are consciously
reflecting on the social and political-economic situation of
the storytellers and their community. However, although it
could be argued that members of all societies “lime” (Eriksen
1990), I do not propose to use the term as a metaphor for
the linguistic performances in mapping workshops. Instead,

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

the concept of liming allows me to arrive at a positive categorization of what I mean by performance and storytelling
in this context: by “stories,” I mean speech acts informed by
an awareness of social and political-economic relationships,
that is, linguistic performances that are simultaneously rhetorical and embodied. By coupling this interpretation of storytelling with a modified version of Stoller’s (1994a) concept
of “performance,” I attempt to draw attention to the links
between the speech act and the embodiment of the storyteller,
arguing (with Ingold 1993) that landscapes are imbued with
the histories and lived experiences of people. Thus, claims to
and perceptions of such embodiments of landscapes inform
what stories “count” and hence how landscapes are produced.
Although I propose to expand Stoller’s (1994a) definition
of the term “performance” beyond commemorative ceremonies to speech acts akin to liming, I draw on his notion
that “social memories are constructed and conveyed” (p. 638)
through embodied performances of speech acts. These performances “constitute rather than reflect action. They are not
limited to verbal utterances, they are also ‘encoded in set
postures, gestures and movements’” (Stoller 1994a, 638–639,
quoting Connerton 1989, 59). This is to say that words spoken
about places, landscapes, and people are weighed and to varying degrees repeated by the various audiences (not only the
ethnographer or cartographer, but also local listeners) based
not simply on their rhetorical quality but also on the embodiment of the speaker and his or her relationships with the
entanglements of space and histories.
From this perspective on performance as social action, participatory mapping can be understood as a performative process of place making (I borrow the notion of performance as
social action from Myers 1994, 680). Through the performative, iterative productions of identities and spatialities that
take place during the mapmaking process, the workings of
power are made visible. Storytelling as liming sheds light on—
and shows awareness (or lack of awareness) of—the “turbulent relations among perception, state power and lived
experience” (Stoller 2004, 821; see also Taylor 2003). As a
semistructured theater of embodied performances, map production is thus always informed by and implicated in relations
of power; that is, the simultaneous negotiation of identities
and production of spatialities occurring when participants
think and talk about place and landscape unveil relations of
power and the shifting and fluctuating relationships between
place and people.
This brings me to another conceptual leap, which I hope
will be justified by the case studies presented below. I suggest
that by making explicit and visible such productions of spatialities and their embeddedness in structures of inequality,
ethnographers and cartographers engaged with participatory
mapping can move beyond cultural relativism and facilitate
an emancipatory politics—in terms of both “abuses by other
societies . . . and the protection of individuals within a society”
(Turner 1997, 276–277; see also Bourgois 1997). Perhaps, by
revealing the tensions, negotiations, and contestations that

445

characterize participatory-mapping projects, we can heed the
“first rule of practice” of griots: “to create a dynamic tension
between the poetic and the political, the past and the present,”
and thus foreground the power relations in the world (Stoller
1994b, 358).

Participatory Mapping, Knowledge, and
What It Means to Be Local
Before I turn to my case studies of participatory mapping in
Venezuela and Trinidad, it is necessary to explore what maps
are and what maps do as well as what violence is inflicted
when cartographers draw maps of (and even with) indigenous
and local communities. Maps are representational objects intimately implicated in projects of place making, and therefore
they are tools of power. They have unwritten indigenous occupations of places, shaped public opinion in times of crisis
and war, and created expectations for the proper ordering of
the social and the natural. Maps put things and people in
their place. Not only do they order the material world and
make us visualize the where, but through their rhetorical
power they also simultaneously obscure the why. Most
maps—especially “scientific” maps produced by regional,
state, and global institutions and their agents—are mute about
the social context and consequences of their own existence.
The late historical geographer J. B. Harley (1988, 1989,
1990, 1992) posited that maps are inherently ideological representations that reflect the social contexts and interests of
their creators, that cartography is a social practice used to
reproduce dominant world views, and that claims to mimesis
provide the map with its rhetorical power. Subsequent authors
have explored the role of cartography in early state building,
the implications of cartography in the colonial project, the
ways in which cartography has been used in the orientalization
of indigenous and native peoples, and the authoritative role
of geographic information systems (GIS) and remote sensing
in excluding alternative spatialities in development, conservation, and urban planning.1
Exactly because of the power of maps to underwrite hegemonic, symbolic, and material practices, indigenous peoples,
residents of marginalized urban neighborhoods, and other
subordinate groups now draw on the rhetorical power of maps
to present alternative world views and futures. Such “ethnocartography,” “indigenous mapping,” “cultural mapping,”
or “community-based mapping” is said to represent local or
indigenous interests and conceptions of landscapes and so
lead to more democratic decision-making processes. However,
beyond the potential role of participatory mapping in development and conservation planning, such “countermapping”
(Peluso 1995) also represents an alternative and more just
way of thinking about and producing landscapes (see Chapin,
1. Crampton (2001); Duncan and Ley (1993); Monmonier (1991);
Pickles (1995, 2004); Rundstrom (1990, 1991, 1993); Scott (1999); Wood
(1992, 1993).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

446

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Lamb, and Threlkeld 2005 for a survey of the history and
advances in indigenous mapping).2
The conception of participatory mapping as a means to
justice and self-determination has been the subject of rigorous
and thoughtful critiques by both mapping practitioners and
activists and theorists in anthropology and related fields.
These analyses often focus on the potential Western uses and
abuses of native knowledge involved in the reinscribing of
gendered, temporal, and dynamic conceptions of space into
synchronic Cartesian cartographies (see, e.g., Rocheleau 2005)
and the incorporation of indigenous information into the
knowledge management systems of development institutions
(Samoff and Stromquist 2001). Also of concern are the limits
imposed on participation in mapping projects, the social and
cultural implications of technology transfers, the role of such
projects in local conflicts, and the potential reproduction of
uneven gender relations or other inequalities of power and
access to resources in local communities (see, e.g., Sundberg
2004 on the role of mapping in the gendering and labeling
of indigenous peoples in Guatemala).3 “Mapping” has thus
become central to the discussion surrounding culture, conservation, and territory, both as a research and planning tool
and as a metaphor for exploring the complex links between
place and people at multiple levels of analysis (see especially
Brosius, Tsing, and Zerner 2005).
The literature on participatory mapping has been criticized
for reproducing the binaries that define the raison d’être of
development: between local and global, developed and underdeveloped, First and Third World, modern and nonmodern, indigenous and nonindigenous, and most important, rational science and un-“disciplined” local knowledge (see, e.g.,
Brosius 1997, 1999, 2001; Kirsch 2007; Milton 1996; Nygren
1999; Ulloa 2005). Instead, according to such critiques, local
and scientific knowledge must be seen as contested, “heterogeneous” or “hybrid” knowledges incorporating local and
global dimensions (Agrawal 1995; Appadurai 1995; Gupta
1998; see also Moore 1996; Myer 1998; Nader 1996; Nygren
1999, 282; Sillitoe 1998). Similarly, cultures are no longer
comfortably viewed as discrete phenomena occupying neatly
demarcated “fields” but instead are seen as fluid and contingent results of the increasingly rapid contraction of space and
time in a globalizing world (Stoller 1996; see also Appadurai
1992; Escobar 2001; Gupta and Ferguson 1997).
These understandings of the mutual production of the local
and the global are useful for problematizing claims of authority in mapping projects and speak directly to the debate
regarding anthropologists’ role in reproducing what some au2. See also Chapin and Threlkeld (2001); Harris and Weiner (1998);
Herlihy (2003); Herlihy and Knapp (2003); Herlihy and Leake (1997);
Kassam and Maher (2000); Poole (1995); Toledo Maya Cultural Council
(1997).
3. See also Fox (1998); Fox et al. (2005); Fox, Yonzon, and Podger
(1996); Gordon, Gurdián, and Hale (2003); Hodgson and Schroeder
(2002); Offen (2003); Orlove (1991, 1993); Rocheleau and Ross (1995);
Roth (2004); Stocks (2003); Walker and Peters (2001).

thors refer to as “invented traditions,” “imagined communities,” and the like (Anderson 1991; Barth 1969, 1995; Hobsbawm 1983). Conversely, anthropologists concerned with
deconstructing essentializing claims have been chided for taking an “uncharitable” stance toward research subjects (Eriksen
1993, 71) and for ignoring the genuine enchantment with
nature commonly found among indigenous people (Brosius
1999). This debate has been amply reviewed elsewhere (see,
e.g., Haley and Wilcoxon 1997; Kirsch 2007); here, I emphasize the importance of teasing out the material relations of
power that also shape these productions of identities and
spatialities. More specifically, desires, fantasies, and fears shape
and are shaped by both the material and the symbolic production of landscapes. In turn, these subjectivities lead to the
production of specific spatialities, for example, spatial imaginaries such as Rosa Emilia’s map of places she had never
seen but which she nevertheless intensely desired to see.
I turn now to an analysis of two participatory-mapping
projects, one a short-term project I initiated and conducted
in an Indo-Trinidadian squatter settlement on the social and
geographical margins of the Caribbean island of Trinidad and
the other a longer-term, more extensive project in indigenous
Pemon territory in Venezuela. Despite their different histories
and social geographies and despite my shorter engagement
with the Trinidadian project, I include both in this article, to
illustrate the ways in which participatory mapping in local
places brings contests surrounding rights, identities, and authenticities to the fore and simultaneously facilitates the unveiling of the multiple, complex relations of power that shape
the production of local-global landscapes in the Global South,
whether these landscapes are popularly considered “indigenous” or not.

Kernahan, Trinidad: Performance,
Contestation, and Not-So-Local
Knowledge
Located on the edge of the 24,000-hectare Nariva Swamp on
the east coast of Trinidad, Kernahan is an informal settlement
populated by about 300 descendants of indentured workers
from India. The majority of the settler families arrived in the
1970s from Indo-Trinidadian communities on the west coast
of the island, especially the communities fringing the Caroni
Swamp. Like the Caroni, the Nariva is a seasonally dry palustrine wetland characterized by a patchwork of swamps, mangroves, marshes, and uplands supporting a complex mosaic
of scattered plant communities (Bacon 1990, 223). Most of
the swamp is passable on foot only in the dry season, or “crop
time,” from January through May. In the rainy season, only
the sandy upland areas (remnants of sea ridges created
through successive sea level decreases) are accessible to local
hunters and fishermen.
These extreme conditions of alternating drought and flood
shape the principal, intimately connected land-use systems in

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

Kernahan: rice farming and freshwater fishing. Small-scale
rice planting is often viewed as a tradition that defines IndoTrinidadian village identity (Vertovec 1992, 213), but it is also
an adaptive strategy linked in intriguing ways to the freshwater
cascadu fishery. The cascadu (Hoplosternum littorale) is found
in seasonally inundated wetlands in Trinidad and lowland
South America and is characterized by underdeveloped gills
and a highly vascularized gut that enables it to breathe air
(Carter and Beadle 1932; cited in Ramnarie 1994, 291). Its
life cycle begins at the onset of the wet season in June or July,
when the first flood induces the fish to scatter throughout
the swamp, build nests, and breed. During the dry season,
the fish retreat to the deepest parts of the rivers, which are
permanently inundated.
To more easily catch cascadu, fishermen “clean” rivers to
keep them open and thus provide habitat for the fish. Similarly, rice paddies provide a suitable environment for cascadu
and make them easy to catch in close proximity to the village.
My primary research interest was to study the links between
fluctuating subsidies for rice and attendant changes in the
spatial extent of the freshwater fishery. Specifically, with increases in subsidies, the acreage of rice paddies expanded,
incomes from rice production increased, and more cascadu
became available to catch near the village. As a result, less
fishing was conducted in far-flung areas of the villagers’ fishing zone (Sletto 1998, 2002, 2005).
To elucidate the specific changes in the spatial extent of
fishing zones during the past two decades, I used a mixed,
participatory research methodology including surveys, interviews, and participatory mapping. My principal informants
were a group of about a dozen fishermen, about half of whom
were older than 50 and retired from fishing and the other
half young and still actively fishing. I recruited these fishermen
through word of mouth, and with the help of the elder fisherman Michael Cecil, I organized a series of participatorymapping workshops to draw natural features, toponyms, and
the location of fishing grounds over the course of the previous
15 years.4 The mapping project, then, was not intended to
serve any political purpose, such as land titling, and would
not bring financial or material rewards to participants. The
fishermen’s work would merely serve to illuminate local land
use and document local toponyms for the benefit of an eager
graduate student.
Why, then, apart from a sense of goodwill, and perhaps to
take advantage of the opportunity to lime about a landscape
produced and embodied by their experiences and their memories, did these fishermen participate in these time-consuming
mapping workshops? I came to realize that their participation—their multiple performances of place and people—
made sense in the social and political context of the time,
which was characterized by both a contentious national debate
4. I digitized these sketch maps, using the GIS program ArcView; the
original sketch maps, which were not scanned, were returned to the
community.

447

about the meaning and future of the Nariva and a localized
conflict about alternative methods of catching cascadu. It appeared that, in the words of Taylor (2003, 245), through “the
arts of memory and narrative performance,” the fishermen
were (re)producing village identity to “make sense of their
own presents.”
The fishing conflict revolved around the use of cascadu
traps, and the main protagonists were a group of about a
half-dozen young, unmarried men who had settled in the
village in the early 1990s and the dozen fishermen born and
raised in Kernahan who participated in the mapping project.
The fishermen native to Kernahan did not use cascadu traps,
claiming that they led to overfishing and financial losses for
those who use castnets or hook and line. The trappers, meanwhile, maintained that they were not harming the fish stock
or threatening the livelihoods of other fishermen. I soon
found myself positioned on the side of the original fishermen
in this contest over resource access, in part by my personal
association with the oldest settler families, that is, those opposed to trapping. These families were Hindu traditionalists,
and in a community sharply divided over religion—about
half the village had joined two Evangelical churches—I was
identified as a supporter of Hindu perspectives on ecology
and resource use. Members of Hindu families often suggested
to me that their spirituality prohibited them from doing the
landscape any harm; in other words, their “spiritual belonging” supported their claim for “deep belonging” to the Nariva
Swamp (Trigger and Mulcock 2005, 307). To further exacerbate the division between the two groups, the more recently
arrived fishermen belonged to a kin group different from that
of the original settlers. Men who had been identified to me
as “trappers” therefore avoided the mapping workshops and
spoke with me infrequently and with caution.
From the half-dozen interviews I held with trappers, I
learned that cascadu traps are set when water levels in the
swamp are rapidly changing and the fish are on the move.
This occurs at the onset of the dry season in December, when
the fish leave the marshes to find refuge in deeper parts of
perennial rivers, and during the first torrential rains in June,
when the fish disperse into the marshes and swamps. One
well-made trap can catch hundreds or even thousands of fish.
Nevertheless, trappers argued, the fish stock was not threatened by their use of the cascadu traps. Also, because of the
depressed domestic rice market at the time, it was necessary
to sell more cascadu to make ends meet, hence the traps. Such
arguments held little sway with older fishermen. They needed
to adjust to lower rice prices, too, but they still cared about
the environment and did not want to overfish the swamp.
These positionings are more illuminating when interpreted
within the political-economic context of the late 1990s. At
the time, a national park was being planned for this area, and
fishermen often discussed with me the possibility of obtaining
jobs as game wardens or tour guides. As Michael Cecil, the
elder cascadu fisherman who led the mapping workshops once
told me,

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

448

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

If these traps continue this way, my children will wonder
what a cascadu is. I could make a trap, I could set a trap,
but I don’t want to. Because I want the cascadu to be here
tomorrow and the next day and the next year. . . . If I was
a game warden, I would check every day, and make sure
there were no traps.

Thus, by voicing their opposition to the practice of trapping,
villagers not only contended for access to resources but also
presented an image as the swamp’s protectors. The mapping
workshop became an opportunity for some fishermen to represent their local knowledge as most appropriate for the
proper management of fish resources. In fact, as some of the
fishermen told me on various occasions, they participated in
the workshops from a sense of responsibility to report “accurately” what they knew about fishing in the Nariva Swamp.
At this stage, then, it became necessary to draw a distinction
between intention and use of these maps—not just from the
perspective of the participants, but also from my perspective
as a geographer (Morphy 1994). My presence and initiative
had provoked not simply a collaborative process to document
local knowledge but the telling of stories to effect relations
of power (Taylor 2003, 256). The mapping project had become a theater for the public performance of prototypical
traditional fishermen. Those who associated themselves with
this identity formation—that is, the “original” settlers who
adhered to what they saw as environmentally sound practices—claimed to be the “natural” stewards of the Nariva
Swamp and therefore claimed the right to determine the rules
of the cascadu fishery. The mapping project thus provided a
stage for the “authentication of their experience” in front of
a sympathetic audience of friends and an activist researcher
(Myers 1994, 694). This is partly why the toponyms included
on the final maps reflect the histories of the original settler
families and even the personal histories of some of the older
fishermen (figs. 1, 2). Gold Teeth Corner, for example, is
named in memory of one of the fishermen’s former girlfriends; Breakass Hill marks a particularly steep and slippery
hill. Two rivers are named in honor of retired fishermen—
Pedro Stream and Malik River—because these fishermen were
the first (in the memory of Kernahan’s elders) to fish and
“clean” these rivers.
However, these performances of authenticity were not informed only by the contest for local fish resources. In the late
1990s, the Nariva Swamp was threatened by an increase in
commercial rice production, prompted in part by greater state
support for the rice industry. Trinidadian environmentalists—
mostly well-connected, wealthy residents of the capital, Port
of Spain—mounted a campaign against the commercial rice
producers, representing their large-scale clearing of swamp
forests as the antithesis of the time-honored, sustainable practices of the “local” fishermen. They constructed Kerhanan as
a “typical” Indo-Trinidadian village where people had developed intimate ties with their characteristic environment. The
fact that the village owed its existence to economic and po-

litical marginalization and that residents were still economically beholden to descendants of European plantation owners
was left out of these narratives (Brereton 1974, 1981, 1993;
Clarke 1993; Henry 1993; Singh 1974; Vertovec 1990, 1992;
Weller 1968). Instead, this construction of Kernahan as a
bounded, “indigenous” locality provided the impetus for conservation interventions and greater state control over village
life. Land tenancy is being regularized, leading to concerns
that properties will fall under the control of wealthier villagers,
and the state wildlife section is increasing its monitoring of
the swamp, potentially limiting villagers’ access to resources
(Sletto 2002, 2005).
Thus, the performances in the participatory-mapping project not only were informed by a local contest surrounding
knowledge and authenticities but also reflected regional and
state political economies and contested constructions of nature, place, and people. Even though the “Battle of Nariva”
was largely fought in the remote spaces of national media and
academia, it was becoming apparent to villagers that the Nariva Swamp was being “discovered” and reconfigured into a
conservation space. Claiming to be a traditional, authentic
fisherman would be strategically useful in encounters with
external agents, who more often than not would be concerned
with environmental conservation rather than economic development (see Baptiste 2008 for more on villagers’ environmental concerns). The participatory-mapping project, then,
became a space for articulating the past in the context of the
present, for seizing “hold of a memory as it flashes up in a
moment of danger” (Benjamin 1968, 255). Talking about the
landscape meant talking about history and rights and belonging but also about the threat of commercial rice growers,
“intruders” who threatened the cascadu stock, and the increasing presence of state agents. Thus, the mapping project
became a means to imagine futures desired and futures feared.

Making Maps: Positionality, Method,
and Conflict
While the Indo-Trinidadians in Kernahan live in a marginalized rural community with little resort to claims of indigeneity, the Pemon, one of the Carib group of indigenous
peoples, have inhabited the Gran Sabana since before the
arrival of Europeans in the New World (Huber 1995, 54–55)
and have been vocal in expressing their indigenous identity.
They number today about 20,000 and live throughout the
southeastern corner of Venezuela, in southern Guyana, and
in western Brazil (see Cousins 1991; Mansutti 1981; Thomas
1982; and Urbina 1979; see also De Armellada 1943 and KochGrunberg 1981). The Pemon are undergoing complex, uneven
processes of social change, depending to a large degree on
their location within the savanna landscape. In communities
located along the Pan-American Highway between Puerto
Ordaz and Boa Vista, the capital of the Brazilian state of
Roraima, residents are increasingly dependent on a cash economy based almost exclusively on tourism, while in more re-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 1. Mental map with place names, drawn by fishermen of Kernahan, Trinidad, fall 1998.
This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 2. Mental map of streams and waterways, drawn by fishermen of Kernahan, Trinidad, fall 1998.
This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

mote communities, Pemon still subsist through traditional
practices such as fishing, hunting, gardening, and gathering
(Butt-Colson 1985; Kingsbury 1999).
My primary research interest in the Gran Sabana was the
cultural and political-economic causes and consequences of a
conflict between the Pemon and state agencies regarding grasslands fire management. The parastatal Electrificación del Caronı́
(EDELCA) is the principal state agency charged with fire management within the boundaries of Canaima National Park,
which covers most of the Pemon ancestral lands in the Gran
Sabana. In part, I sought to assess dominant narratives about
indigenous burning practices, specifically, claims by EDELCA
fire managers that indigenous fire use was causing loss of gallery
forests. As I eventually came to realize during my four years
of living in the two communities of Kumarakapay and Monte
Bello, these claims were too simplistic. Instead, forest loss
through indigenous burning is contingent on geographical realities and social change. Fire suppression appears to be leading
to increased fuel loads and more extensive fires. Indigenous
burning appears to reduce fuel loads in forest-savanna boundaries, preventing fire encroachment in forest patches (Sletto
2006, 2008; see also Rodrı́guez 2004, 2007).
Shortly before my arrival in the Gran Sabana for the first
time in summer 2001, a new Venezuelan constitution appeared to create an increasing role for civil society in national
governance and to provide indigenous people with limited
territorial rights to so-called habitats. A subsequent demarcation law provided a more explicit definition of what constituted “habitat” (places of cultural, historic, and economic
significance for the sustenance of traditional culture) and thus
provided a legal framework for the participatory-mapping
project.5 Although progress has been slow in the actual granting of indigenous habitats under the demarcation law, the
constitutional guarantee was a milestone for indigenous rights
in Venezuela, and a number of new mapping projects have
been implemented in its wake.6
Before arriving in the Gran Sabana, then, I was aware of
the political potential of the new constitution, and I saw the
opportunity to conduct a research project that incorporated
an activist dimension drawing on my academic training in
GIS and cartography. From the outset, however, I was concerned about the many technical, logistical, and social limitations and implications of such participatory-mapping projects as well as the unpredictable political consequences of my
5. Ley de Demarcación y Garantı́a del Hábitat y Tierras de los Pueblos
Indı́genas (Gaceta Oficial no. 37.118, January 12, 2001).
6. The legislation also established a government commission for the
demarcation of indigenous “habitats,” but its work has been stymied by
procedural conflicts, and the actual demarcation of indigenous lands has
been stalled. Pemon leaders are also increasingly frustrated by the tightening of the requirements for adequate documentation of indigenous
occupancy of traditional lands. In January 2007, a new Ministerio de los
Pueblos Indı́genas was established, and it is now overseeing the demarcation process (Gaceta Oficial no. 38.599, 8 January 2007, http://minpi
.gob.ve/minpi/content/view/61/1/).

451

engagement. As I became more visible in the Pemon communities through my work, teenagers, women, and elder Pemon became increasingly enthusiastic and supportive: young
people and women in part because of the opportunities afforded to participate and elders because of the privileging of
their knowledge.
However, some Pemon, in particular a small group of elite
young political leaders, began to increasingly distance themselves from me. Toward the end of my four years in the Gran
Sabana, I was indirectly informed of their complaints that I
had assumed too much control of the project. Through subsequent conversations with these political leaders, who held
elected offices or were appointed to regional or national institutions, I learned that although the project was successful
in one aspect (my collaborators and I had produced a map
of Pemon sector 5, as promised), they felt that I had failed
to sufficiently train Pemon in GIS or to leave behind any
computer equipment for them to continue mapping other
sectors of Pemon territory. The project had been part of a
trade from the outset: community leaders had given me permission to conduct my research of fire management in return
for leading the mapping project, and no mention had been
made about furnishing computers or GIS training. But despite
my self-righteous frustration with what I felt were unreasonable complaints, I realized that these national and regional
leaders, who rarely had time to visit remote villages and to
whom I had little access because of their location in large
urban centers far from the Gran Sabana, had felt marginalized.
Although the map was completed, they were not pleased with
how I had unwittingly sidelined them during the project.
These were not the only community factions leery of my
work. A few community members in Kumarakapay—especially members of families who had little or no engagement
with outsiders, had been marginalized in the increasingly divisive competition for access to the tourism industry, and had
no relatives on the mapping team—occasionally voiced fears
that I was serving corporate or state interests. Such claims—
which became more and more infrequent and, as I later
learned, were always adamantly contradicted by other community members—made sense, given the history of the Gran
Sabana—not just the colonial experience but also the more
recent history of encroaching mining companies, the establishment of the national park, and the settlement of the border
city of Santa Elena, where nonindigenous operators largely
control the tourism industry and Pemon are increasingly becoming a marginalized underclass. Making indigenous landscapes visible in new material forms, such as maps, is a move
fraught with risks, raising complex questions about representation, appropriation, and dissemination. As in the case of
other indigenous art, it is important to consider structures
and the rules of ownership of such maps (Myers 2004). Although the capitanes in sector 5 had given me formal written
permission to publish these maps both in digital and printed
form for educational purposes, these conversations were im-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

452

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

portant reminders of the need to reflect on the unknowable
consequences of such global dissemination (Myers 2004).7
The ethnocartographers, project coordinators, and I were
also surprised during two mapping workshops when a few
community members adamantly refused to work with us because of fears that I and my collaborators had arrived in the
village to “take land away from them,” either to “sell” or to
incorporate in the greater land-use area of Kumarakapay,
which is the largest and most acculturated community in the
Gran Sabana, the home of my collaborators, and also where
I spent most of my time. We came to realize that in both
cases the complaints were informed by animosities between
some community members and the capitan of Kumarakapay.
These animosities stemmed in part from what was seen as
Kumarakapay’s betrayal during a conflict in the late 1990s
concerning the construction of a high-voltage power line
through Pemon lands. While I was waiting for a resolution
to these conflicts, which in both cases lasted for an entire day,
my collaborators repeatedly explained the purpose of the
mapping project—to produce a map of the entire sector 5 to
be used in subsequent negotiations for land rights—and we
were eventually welcomed in all 12 communities in sector 5.
The collaborators I have been referring to were 12 graduates
of two one-month training programs I held in the spring of
2002 and 2003 in Kumarakapay. Developed and taught with
the collaboration and assistance of the capitan at the time,
Juvencio Gómez, and the coordinator of the mapping project,
Claudio Gómez, the two courses were intended to instruct
students in basic cartographic techniques and to share experiences with participatory mapping in other indigenous
landscapes. The 12 graduates from these courses self-identified as “ethnocartographers” and organized and led all the
subsequent mapping workshops, working directly with elders
to draw maps based on landmarks they had previously traced
from remote-sensing images. Although I was present in most
of these workshops, my input was limited to a personal introduction, occasional consultations with ethnocartographers
about technical questions, and day-long hikes to record geographic coordinates with global positioning system (GPS) receivers. The ethnocartographers also participated in digitizing
the sketch maps, editing the GIS, and designing the final map,

7. An example of unintended consequences of such mapping projects
is the work now conducted by the Venezuelan branch of the Nature
Conservancy (TNC) in other Pemon sectors. Although some ethnocartographers are assisting TNC, they are split in their view of the organization’s intent. Some are displeased with the more limited participation
and cartographic training in other sectors. Some are also concerned that
the mapping project carried out by TNC (initiated immediately after the
termination of the project in sector 5 and without consultation with
project participants in sector 5) is conducted primarily to benefit conservation interests. Pemon leaders have not permitted TNC to work in
sector 5.

which I completed in its entirety with my laptop while I was
living in Kumarakapay.8
My relationship with the ethnocartographers (10 males and
two women aged 17–28) and the dynamics within the group
deserve a much deeper exposition than is possible here. The
group was far from homogenous, and they initially became
embroiled in conflict related to gender relations and hierarchical family relationships. Although Cristina Rossi and
Brenda Fernández eventually emerged as popular leaders of
the group, in part through my encouragement, they initially
met resistance from male ethnocartographers. Also, graduates
from the first course in spring 2002 were members of wealthier families more closely connected with the tourism industry.
The second cohort, who graduated in spring 2003, were members of less well-off families who enjoyed fewer benefits from
the tourism industry, and most of them had less formal education and spoke Spanish with some difficulty. After a few
months, however, the ethnocartography team developed into
a cohesive group to the point of exclusion, organizing social
events, communicating independently with capitanes and elders from throughout the Gran Sabana, wearing T-shirts and
carrying business cards with the project logo they designed,
and enjoying their status as “los etnocartógrafos.”
As in the case of Kernahan, then, the mapping workshops
in the Gran Sabana provided a forum for the contested reproduction of identities, spatialities, and indigeneity through
performativity and storytelling. However, the political stakes
were higher (the future demarcation of indigenous territory),
and more diverse groups of mapmakers were involved: members of a dozen communities, each experiencing different rates
of acculturation and exposure to state agents and tourists;
teenagers and elders; women and men; local capitanes and
national leaders; ethnocartographers from different social and
economic backgrounds; and, of course, my own white male
person, embodying complex memories of domination, promises made and broken, and hopes of future monetary benefits
and social status. Also, two versions of the Pemon language
are spoken in the Gran Sabana: Arekuna in the north and
Taurepan in the south. Although the two languages are mu8. Before the start of the project, village capitanes in sector 5 and I
(as “principal investigator and cartographer”) signed a formal agreement
giving me permission to bring all hand-drawn maps temporarily to Kumarakapay, Caracas, and Cornell University for scanning and laminating.
They also gave me permission to use data from the mapping workshops
in my maps illustrating indigenous and state fire management approaches
(Sletto 2006). During presentation of the final printed map in February
2004, my collaborators and I returned all the now-laminated original
sketch maps to the appropriate communities and also provided capitanes
from all communities with 2 # 2 -meter color printouts of the final map
and CDs that included the digital GIS map and all photographs and video
footage recorded in the respective communities. The final maps were
produced in their entirety in Kumarakapay on my own laptop with the
GIS program ArcView 3.2 and were printed on archival photographic
paper, courtesy of the Unidad de Información Geográfica of the Centro
de Ecologı́a, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas (IVIC),
and the Centro Internacional de Ecologı́a Tropical at IVIC.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

tually intelligible, intermarriage is not common between the
two linguistic groups, and capitanes tend to divide along linguistic lines in elections for capitan general (the mostly symbolic head of sector 5). In what remains of this article, then,
I will consider how these social relations were negotiated and
(re)produced through memories and knowledge of place and
landscape as Pemon “culture” was taking on “new and varied
forms of materiality” (Myers 2004, 6) in the form of maps.

Talking Landscapes: Memory, Authority,
and What It Means to Be Pemon
Among the once seminomadic Pemon, elders (abuelos and
abuelas) are considered the bearers of genuine indigeneity. Elders are the privileged purveyors of traditional environmental
and spatial knowledge, respected for their insights into the
mystical realm and the pantons of the ancestors. As the elder
Antonio Gonzalez once said to me, “It is I who know.” This
claim to authority is based on movement and seeing, that is,
on the number of years spent walking, observing, and producing the landscape through their presence. Most of my elder
informants preferred talking about fire management while
walking or resting on special spots (pata eredok) on the top of
high hills with sweeping views of savanna grasses in shades of
green punctuated by dark splashes of forest groves, great sweeps
of rivers, and wispy plumes of smoke. However, since the 1950s,
the development of the highway to the Brazilian border, coupled
with a national strategy to form permanent agricultural nuclei,
has led to the formation of large villages such as Kumarakapay.
Extensive areas once populated, especially near the borders with
Guyana and Brazil, are now visited only during hunting and
fishing expeditions. Elders who were born in nomadic settlements and who still walk the old trails thus embody nostalgia
for these remote landscapes.
In the mapping workshops, elders quickly took the lead in
drawing the more sophisticated second-stage maps, working
with the trained ethnocartographers to demarcate natural and
cultural features and locations of land-use activities.9 This was
unremarkable, given the respect for elders and their knowledge;
in addition, Pemon leaders had also asked me to prioritize the
participation of elders in the mapping workshops. However,
elders’ hegemony has been increasingly challenged by younger
community members, especially in acculturated communities
where capitanes are young and unaccustomed to traditional
9. Pemon workshop participants (children, women, and men) initially
drew sketch (“mental”) maps on empty sheets of paper, working in groups
based on age and gender. In the following days, self-selected local experts
(mainly elder men) worked with the ethnocartographers to systematically
draw natural features and locations of land-use activities and sites of
cultural significance on large sheets with predrawn visual guides. Workshops were held in 10 different communities in Pemon sector 5 with the
participation of about 300 people, resulting in 12 different maps of village
territories. The 12 separate maps were digitized in ArcView 3.2 to form
a single map of sector 5 using georeferenced satellite imagery and about
2,000 GPS points as additional reference.

453

land-use practices. Conversely, elders are often frustrated with
younger Pemon because of their lack of “indigenous knowledge.” The mapping project brought this criticism of the miseducation of younger Pemon to the fore, partly because it made
visible their lack of traditional knowledge and partly because
the spatialities of younger Pemon often reflected the influence
of modernity on youth culture. Elders therefore used the public
stage afforded by the workshops to tell stories of landscape,
identity, and belonging, thus reproducing what they saw as the
meaning of Pemon indigeneity.
In a mapping workshop held March 4, 2002, in Kumarakapay, Laurencio, a young man in his early 20s, recently married, was working with Rafael, one of the most respected elders
and also one of the founders of this modern village, having
been born at a time when the Pemon were still seminomadic.
Laurencio was drawing rivers on the map per Rafael’s instructions, and this conversation ensued:10
Rafael: This place called Apak is where I lived before
with my parents. It’s north of the Kukenan River.
Wuararita was also one of our places [pata, land]
when we were children.
Pause.
Rafael (exclaiming): You young people don’t know anything! Because those who know, are we, the grandfathers. But you don’t. This is because the grandfathers
have been moving back and forth from one place to the
next. Because of this we know everything up to the corners. After we do all this, all who come after us will
know. They will see all the places, the rivers, the hills.
Laurencio (in a mollifying tone): Yes, that’s why we are
doing this work. Thinking about our children.
Rafael: We need to put down everything, because in the
future, if we leave spaces open, the people who work
in tourism might take them from us.
In this conversation, Rafael is expressing the superiority of
his knowledge based on his lifelong experience and is adamant
in his attempt to educate Laurencio. His claims to uniqueness,
then, are associated with persistence: Rafael continues to walk
the same distant trails that he walked as a young man. Time
is articulated with place through his embodiment of the landscape. However, his stories are performed in the context of
discontinuity (young Laurencio has never walked some of
these trails), reflecting the paradoxes of indigenous activism,
which exhibit characteristics of both continuity and discontinuity with the past (Haley and Wilcoxon 1997). Also important is his emphasis on movement. Rafael is a member of
the first generation of permanently settled Pemon, and he still
sees walking as a virtue and, most importantly, as a means
to see and thus to learn. Even though elders have very little
formal education, they have little difficulty drawing pano10. Informal conversations during mapping workshops were recorded
with the permission of participants and later translated by Anibal Herrera
and me.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

454

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

ramic maps to a relatively high degree of accuracy, using
ordering techniques to bestow control of the landscape on
the viewer (Cosgrove 1984).
Another important point is Rafael’s reference to “corners.”
Pemon visualize their landscape as both finite and infinite:
infinite in the sense that one can always move from one place
to the next and finite in the sense that a group of families
have usufruct to a certain territory and that villages are separated by fluctuating but nevertheless meaningful boundaries.
Rafael’s use of the term corners alludes to the necessity of
knowing not only the stories and meanings of the landscape
but also the spatial extent of your space, your kowantok, which
roughly translates to “homeland” but also means “life.” In a
broader sense, his comment implicitly links indigenous
knowledge, indigenous land rights, and cultural survival, a
rhetorical strategy commonly used among indigenous organizations (Haley and Wilcoxon 1997; Kirsch 2007). To Rafael,
the map is not simply a representation of a land claim but a
material object that embodies indigenous identity. Blank
spaces on the map would suggest that Pemon are not fulfilling
their responsibility to the landscape handed down by their
ancestors. (The spiritual connection elder Pemon feel for the
Gran Sabana, which is related through pantons, precludes academic deconstruction [see Brosius 1999]; it is also beyond
the scope of this paper.)
From a perspective of indigenous resistance, however, the
concept of “filling in” empty spaces illustrates the role of
mapmaking as art and thus as a social activity intended to
effect relations of power (Gell 1998). Any white space on the
map would serve as an admission that the space is not used
or inhabited. In the words of Antonio Pérez, another elder
(speaking on October 12, 2003, at the start of the week-long
revision of the draft map),
The tuponken11 [outsiders, “people who wear clothes”] have
forced indigenous people to live in small sites, very closed
in, and sure, when they then see all that empty space (where
indigenous people don’t live), they say, “Why do the indigenous people need these lands, since they don’t live in
these empty spaces?”

This is also what Rosa Emilia means when she says that “much
is missing still”: the women’s map needs to be filled in by
the elder men. Through their embodiment in and of the
landscape, elder men are best suited to manage this translation
of culture into new material forms, in part because they know
what place-names are “safe” representations of their landscape
(Geismar and Tilley 2003, 179).
However, the elders’ performance of indigenous identity
did not always pass uncontested. Younger or female Pemon
11. There are three different forms of Pemon—Taurepan, Arekuna,
and Kamarakoto—which differ in both pronunciation and vocabulary.
I derive my spellings here from De Armellada (1943). Few texts are
published in Pemon, and spelling and orthography are inconsistent, depending in part on what form of Pemon is spoken by the author and/
or the translator.

express conflicting desires for tradition and modernity and
tend to defy elders, just as they voice criticism of state agencies. This is a segment of the conversation among the women
drawing their sketch map in the workshop on February 24,
2002, in Kumarakapay; as discussed above, the protagonists
are Cristina Rossi (in her late teens at the time), Rosa Emilia
Fernández (in her early 40s), and Leticia Fernández (a grandmother in her 50s and also Cristina’s mother).
Rosa Emilia: Kadawata River empties into Chirimota
River.
Leticia: Chirimota River starts at Akurimota.
Rosa Emilia: No, Kurui River starts at Akurimota!
Pause.
Rosa Emilia: Claudio knows everything!
Cristina: Sure. Because he travels in helicopters.
Rosa Emilia: We are taking an exam in geography!
Rosa Emilia: After Karawata comes Arapota.
Cristina: Really?
Rosa Emilia: Kamaiwa is a mining area.
Leticia: We ourselves are making our map. Why? It’s because we are from here.
I suggest that this passage illustrates the articulations between
identity formation, gender relations, and spatialities that characterized the mapping workshops. After a brief argument
about what river starts at Akurimota, Rosa Emilia exclaims
that “Claudio knows everything.” Claudio, the coordinator
for the mapping project, has long been employed by EDELCA
and is occasionally flown in the company helicopter to locations throughout the Gran Sabana. Although many villagers
resent EDELCA for the domination the company represents,
they also grudgingly respect Claudio for his opportunities to
enjoy a visual perspective superior to the view from the top
of a hill. Cristina, who was still in high school at the time,
offers the opinion that of course Claudio knows the landscape
better than the elders because his knowledge is derived from
modern technology.
Rosa Emilia then suggests that they are “taking an exam.”
Implied in her statement is the notion that the women are
being tested and must live up to standards set by elder men.
However, Leticia marvels at the fact that they (or rather “we,”
meaning the women) are actually making their own map.
That is because they “are from here,” she says; that is, the
women’s local knowledge is validated by their birth and lifelong presence within the embrace of their kowantok. In her
subtle way, Leticia appears to be countering Cristina’s suggestion that Claudio knows better because of his scientific
knowledge; at the very least, she suggests that they, the women,
have as much right to make their own map because they are
also “from here.” The mapping workshop, then, became a
stage for women to perform their own stories of place and
landscape. By employing traditional structures—privileging
elders’ knowledge, foregrounding the significance of embodied experience—they were able to cross established social
boundaries (see, e.g., Okafor 1994).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

Ultimately, the conversation illustrates several axes of tension associated with the reproduction of “genuine” indigenous
knowledge and hence “proper” indigenous identity: strongly
cemented gender relationships were both reaffirmed and challenged, knowledge claims were contested, and generational
conflicts simmered beneath the surface. About two weeks
later, these contests intensified in another workshop, where
Cristina—now a graduate of the ethnocartography course
with a developing identity as an “expert” in a field of modern
science—had the following conversation with Rosa Emilia and
Antonio Pérez, an elder respected for his physical strength,
endurance, and knowledge:
Rosa Emilia: Look, is “Monte Bello” the name [of the
village] in Pemon or does it have another name?
Antonio (annoyed): No, sure it has its own name. It’s
called Panaimota.
Cristina (frustrated): What’s with all these details!? Do
we have to correct this? Write the name in Pemon?
Rosa Emilia: So now what’s missing is fixing all these
mistakes.
Cristina (sarcasm in her voice): So, now, is there anything
else missing that we need to put on this map?
Antonio (exclaiming): Yes, yes! What’s missing is changing all the names into Pemon!
Ironically, Antonio’s emphasis on writing place-names in Pemon rather than in Spanish did not simply originate locally.
In the beginning of the project, the ethnocartographers and
elders occasionally wrote or told us place-names in Spanish,
and Pemon leaders would encourage them to provide the
toponym in Pemon, thus contributing to the (re)production
of a Pemon identity that privileges traditionalists (see, e.g.,
Haley and Wilcoxon 1997; Hornborg 1994). In fact, in the
Gran Sabana, some Spanish place-names created by nonindigenous state officials are more commonly used than Pemon
toponyms. For instance, even when speaking in Taurepan,
villagers typically refer to Kumarakapay as “San Francisco,”
which was its name at its founding in the 1940s. Only in the
late 1990s did the village chief at the time, an activist leader
with experience in national politics, lobby to change the name
to Kumarakapay after the creek located at the site of the
original settlement.
Other linguistic inconsistencies abounded. Villagers commonly used the Pemon words paru or dapö to label creeks
and intermittent waterways but used the Spanish word rı́o
(river) instead of tanno tuna to indicate rivers. They labeled
hills sometimes with the Pemon word tüpü and other times
with the Spanish word cerro. On the same map, a natural
feature might be given both its Pemon and Spanish toponyms.
The community of Agua Frı́a, for instance, is named after the
river with the same name, in Spanish. In Pemon, the name
of the community and the river is Kuy Yeremepö. On the
map drawn by adult men during a mapping workshop in this
community, participants used the Pemon name to refer to
the upper part of the river—located at the greatest remove

455

from the highway, in a landscape more exclusively embodied
by the experiences of Pemon hunters and fishermen—and
the Spanish toponym to label the lower part of the river where
it crosses the Pan-American Highway.
The ironies continue. Antonio was wrong when he identified Monte Bello as Panaimota, because the name of the
village is, in fact, Itewata. This is not to say that Antonio did
not know the proper name; this is a short segment of a longer,
animated conversation, and Rosa Emilia and Antonio simply
miscommunicated. The point is that Rosa Emilia (a politically
savvy and “radical” woman chafing at the gender politics that
preclude her from leadership in the village) did not know the
name of the village in Pemon but sensed the political value
of writing the name in Pemon. After she made this point to
Antonio, he then rebuffed the unusual challenge from Cristina
(who was emboldened by her participation in the ethnocartography course) and again assumed authority because of his
“traditional” knowledge. In this way, the significance and form
of this particular spatiality was debated, and a decision was
made. It became clear that it was necessary to represent the
indigenous identity of the community of Monte Bello through
words as well as images and that this would show the occupation of space not only by Pemon, but by “genuine” Pemon well versed in their identity.

Grounds for Resistance: Entanglements
of the Material and the Symbolic
I have revealed some of the ways in which landscape and
identities were mutually constituted through processes of social change. The mapping workshops became a stage for younger people to reveal their ambivalent embrace of the modern
and for elders to perform their desires for an indigenous
identity derived from historical narratives. However, a political-economic reading of these maps also reveals different
perspectives on the materialities produced through these processes of social change. While the contests between elders and
teenagers drew on specific knowledge formations and conceptions of indigeneity, the maps also reflected the complex
positions of different social groups within broader politicaleconomic structures. The following conversation took place
among teenagers drawing their sketch (mental) map in the
mapping workshops in Kumarakapay on February 24, 2002:
Anel: We are drawing the tepuyes [flat-topped
mountains].
Lino (exclaiming): You’re drawing your map as if you’re
painting a car! Why didn’t you draw the power line?
Roger: Yes, we’re missing the posts and the wires.
Lino: So after this, are they going to give us the land?
Anel: No, first Bjørn is going to bring the maps to the
United States.
Lino: Where is the cattle [grazing] area?
Roger: We’re missing the forest.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

456

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Anel: We need to draw the rivers with blue color, and
the forests with green.
Leonel: We’re missing Taren Ken.
Tony: This is the river Woi.
These five teenagers were working together to draw a map of
the territory of Kumarakapay at the same time that elders
and women were drawing their own maps of the same area,
but before they arrived at their final product, this group of
teenagers went through an impromptu process of negotiation,
as suggested by this slice of their conversation. Unlike the
elders, who started drawing their final map directly on the
1 # 1-meter paper I had supplied, the teenagers decided to
each draw his own map on letter-sized paper and then join
the different representations into one map. It was through
this contested merging of representations that some spatialities were dismissed and others were foregrounded and
adopted as the group’s official rendering of Kumarakapay
territory to be presented to village leaders and elders. Not
surprisingly, this process of negotiation revealed that Pemon
teenagers form and re-form their identities in different ways,
depending on their relationships with political-economic
structures both within and outside the community.
To begin, Anel and Lino are members of relatively poor
families who make their living mainly through subsistence
practices. They were also active in the demonstrations against
the power line that was being built by EDELCA through Pemon lands in the late 1990s. The most radical of the protesters,
among them Lino and Anel, tore down the high-voltage towers as soon as they were erected, blocked the Pan-American
Highway, and faced the tear gas of the National Guard. By
the time of the mapping workshops, a compromise had been
reached, and the power line had been constructed, but the
conflict had influenced Lino and Anel to the extent that their
personal maps present Kumarakapay village territory as a battleground: Anel identifies Kumarakapay as a Zona de Guerra
(war zone; fig. 3), and Lino labels his map No al Tendido
Electrico (“No to the electric line,” the political slogan of the
movement against the electric line; fig. 4). This is one of the
reasons why Lino asks whether making the map means the
villagers will “get their land.” Anel, on the other hand, foresees
a slightly longer process, including a temporary removal of
the maps to the United States.
The other participants in the working group were Roger,
Leonel, and Tony, whose maps display a perspective on Kumarakapay somewhat different from those of Anel and Lino
(figs. 5–7). Roger, Leonel, and Tony are members of large,
prominent families engaged in tourism and the growing service
economy in the village, and Tony was the natural spokesperson
for the group. He was around 20 at the time (the oldest in the
group), one of the most fluent speakers and writers of Spanish
in the community, and a student in a teacher’s college. More
(self-identified) radical young people like Lino and Anel see
Tony, Leonel, and Roger as prey to external influences. Tony,
however, argues that the Pemon should negotiate with state

agencies with the support of scientific knowledge and verbal
eloquence rather than pursue confrontational politics. This is
why he pointedly ignored Lino’s suggestions to draw the power
line on their map and why the teenagers’ joint map resembles
more his own representation and those of Roger and Leonel
(fig. 8). As Tony said when he presented the map on behalf of
the group of teenagers,
We made our map like a city map. We think you will understand it well because we made a legend. The green and
yellow symbol means it is an indigenous community. And
these symbols in blue are the most important tourism sites.
And here we have the agricultural zone.

He then proceeded to point out the location of the power
plant, which was built in the 1970s to bring electricity to San
Ignacio, a nearby community where EDELCA offices are located. The power plant also serves Kumarakapay because of
its location only 8 km from San Ignacio. In the question-andanswer session that followed his presentation, I asked him
why they included the power plant on their map. “It’s because
it’s important for San Ignacio and Kumarakapay,” he answered. “This is where we get our electricity from.”
At that point, Antonio Pérez abruptly rose and said about
the elders’ map (fig. 9),
The mental map we made is in accordance with our grandfathers, who lived in this area. And now you [the teenagers]
need to learn [the extent of this area], because those who
come after us are going to need more land than we have
now. Because we elders are not going to live much longer.

Then Antonio proceeded to recite the place-names that traditionally have marked the boundaries of Kumarakapay village territory, all the while pointing to the horizon. His performance was a form of social action with great awareness of
the audience (Myers 1994), drawing on words, gestures, and
his own embodiment of histories and landscape in his effort
to be persuasive (Stoller 1994a). By reproducing the ritual of
pointing into the distance and speaking the names and histories of places from the top of a high hill, Antonio was also
illustrating the significance of temporalities for making landscapes meaningful (Tilley 1996).
From the group of teenagers, Anel responded plaintively
to Antonio’s recital,
We have made our map but it is very narrow [covering a
smaller area than the elders’ map]. But we have drawn all
of what we have lived. For example, when Christmas comes,
some of us go hunting. And we have included this distance
on our map.

Finally, Laurencio, the young adult who sketched the elders’
map following their directions, stood up and said,
As Antonio said, the teenagers have made a map only to
serve the interests of tourism. They have drawn the waterfalls
and the power plant and the tepuyes, but we have drawn

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 3. Mental map drawn by Anel Delfranco in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

458

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Figure 4. Mental map drawn by Lino Rivas in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.

different things. Because what we have drawn in our map
are the old settlements of the grandfathers and gardens and
other things.

By charging the teenagers with lower authenticity (Hornborg
1994, 255), Laurencio effectively foreclosed any further debate.
An obvious but not particularly useful observation, then,
is that teenagers’ conceptualizations of the landscape differ
from those of elders. This could partly be explained by some
teenagers’ desire to impress the foreign visitor with his cartography skills. The point, however, is that these teenagers
could not have drawn a “traditional” map such as that of the
elders even if they had wanted to, simply because they lacked
the necessary knowledge of histories, place-names, and landuse localities and boundaries. Instead, I suggest that the final
map jointly produced by this group of teenagers was the result
of negotiations implicated in contested reproductions of indigenous identities. Through these contests, one representation (that of the more formally educated and outspoken Tony)

held sway over that of the more rebellious and locally disadvantaged Lino and Anel.
To elaborate, the main point here is that the position of
Kumarakapay within the regional, national, and international
political economy is conceptualized differently by different
social groups and that these conceptualizations are made visible in their maps and revealed in their conversations. While
teenagers discussed the conflict over the power line, elders
recalled pantons and the places where ancestors lived, walked,
and hunted. While elders exclusively drew place-names with
historical significance, the teenagers, under the influence of
Tony, prominently displayed the power station but left out
the power line (which to many Pemon is a complex symbol
of domination but also of indigenous resistance). The teenagers represented scattered gardens as an “agricultural area,”
in keeping with the rhetoric of generations of state development projects; for much the same reason, they sketched
“grazing areas” even though the “cattle industry” consists of
a few underfed heads of cattle owned by one family; and they

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

459

Figure 5. Mental map drawn by Roger Delgado in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.

located “tourist sites” rather than more “typically indigenous”
recreation sites, sacred sites, or historical settlements. The
elders’ map, meanwhile, makes no reference to this material
evidence of state incursion in their territory but instead emphasizes the vastness of the space claimed by Kumarakapay
all the way to “the corners” of their land-use area.

Eventually, the elders’ spatiality won out as the official representation of Pemon sector 5, as it had to because of the
priorities expressed by indigenous leaders. The second-stage,
“intermediary” map of Kumarakapay (which served as the basis
for the final, printed map) came to include “gardens” (locations
of slash-and-burn agriculture) instead of “agricultural zones”

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 6. Mental map drawn by Leonel Rossi in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.
460
This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Figure 7. Mental map drawn by Tony Rodrı́guez in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.
461
This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

462

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Figure 8. Section of mental map drawn by youths in a mapping workshop, Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of
this figure is available in the online edition.

and “bathing places” and “scenic views” instead of “tourist
sites.” No material evidence of state incursion (except for the
Pan-American Highway) was included (fig. 10). Except for the
highway and the Venezuelan border city of Santa Elena, the
final map excludes the power plant, EDELCA installations, National Guard posts, park service structures, and other signs of
state interventions in the area (fig. 11).
Even the title of the final map, “Makunaimö Kowamupö
Dapon,” reflects the significance of continuity in Pemon representation of self and the conscious process of eliminating
what were considered nonindigenous spatialities. What to name
the map was an important topic of discussion during the weeklong sectoral workshop to edit the draft map in fall 2003. The
workshop participants, about 70 elders and capitanes from all
the principal communities in the sector, proposed a variety of
titles that were put to a vote by the entire assembly. The winning
title—which roughly translates as “The flat surface that shows
where Makunaimö lived and walked”—reflects a complex articulation of symbolism, materiality, and embodiment: the Gran
Sabana is alive with stories about Makunaimö, the mythical

predecessor of the Pemon, who conquered this landscape from
the supernatural beings who still inhabit its hills and rivers. To
many Pemon, the spirit of Makunaimö is embodied by the
elders, who have walked the same trails and have seen the places
where Makunaimö lived and therefore know what others do
not. Thus, the Pemon in sector 5—in collusion with their collaborator, the foreign-trained geographer—employed technologies of concealment and exhibition to convert culture into a
new material form (Tilley 1996).

Discussion: Performance, Spatialities
(and Resistance?)
I have explored how performances of histories and knowledges were implicated in the production of spatialities and
the ways in which the mapping process reflected complex
power plays within the communities in Venezuela and in Trinidad. The workshops provided a space for different identities
to be performed but also to be contested. Fishermen in Trinidad performed stories of belonging and persistence to claim

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

463

Figure 9. Section of mental map drawn by elders in a mapping workshop,
Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 24, 2002. A color version of this figure
is available in the online edition.

rights to fishing grounds and to associate themselves with a
winning discourse of environmentalism. Elder Pemon performed in accordance with their memories and embodiment
of a landscape free of the burdens of state interventions, while
(some) teenagers performed from a script written by modernity. In so doing, these teenagers made visible the material
manifestations of political-economic structures while exposing their conflicting desires for modernity and for an idealized
indigenous past. So although the teenagers produced maps
that celebrated state interventions because of the central role
they play in their lives, their map promptly generated a debate
informed by the contested knowledges and imaginaries of
different social groups.
In Rosa Emilia’s words, the women in Kumarakapay had
drawn their map to the limit of their knowledge. In fact, they
had moved beyond firsthand knowledge. They had drawn
places they had seen only in their imaginations, because stories
told of experiences in these places had created what Tilley
(1996) calls “structures of expectation.” This suggests that
cartography is intimately connected with power and not sim-

ply in the sense that some mapmakers have greater means of
producing a “professional” map with the rhetorical stamp of
authority and making it readily available and seemingly important. Instead, cartography as art (Gell 1998) reflects the
ways in which mapmaking facilitates performances and hence
action: stories told of landscapes, embodying different temporalities and knowledges, both reproduce and create new
forms of indigeneity and social relations.
We must also consider the importance of knowing how to
draw a map. Despite the very different political-economic,
social, and historical contexts of the Nariva Swamp and the
Gran Sabana, both fishermen in Kerhanan and elders in Kumarakapay wanted a map of their own, and my intervention
made the map production possible (although only limited
knowledge of mapmaking remained within the communities).
Only in the Gran Sabana did the ethnocartographers learn
how to lead mapping workshops and how to construct mental
maps, but the lack of time, funds, and existing infrastructure
made it impossible to provide software, computer equipment,
or much GIS training. Only recently have the Pemon begun

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

464

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Figure 10. Section of intermediary map drawn by ethnocartographers
after the instruction of elders in mapping workshops, Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 2002. A color version of this figure is available in the
online edition.

using the map in their negotiations for land rights and to
produce a more detailed historical map of Kumarakapay. This
is the promise and pitfall of participatory mapping. Mapping
practitioners will dub their projects “participatory” (in the
sense that these maps are not solely the product of an outside
researcher but the result of a group activity of some sort),
but when these maps enter the global flow of ideas and knowledges, they often move beyond the control and even grasp of
many marginalized peoples.
The two case studies presented here suggest that although
specific political-economic contexts and processes are important in forming everyday spatial practices, participatory
mapping is a performative practice that strives to effect social
relations in ways that transcend regional specificities. The
mapping projects with both the diasporic South Asians in
Trinidad and the indigenous Carib in South America involved
performances of histories and landscapes embodied by the
activities of humans and spirits, positionings and productions
of narratives of belonging and exclusion, and contested visions

of indigeneity and the proper ordering of people, things, and
activities. Although the local, regional, and national governments were quite different in Trinidad and Venezuela (i.e.,
the authorities confronted and the organizing strategies were
different), the maps ended up looking quite similar. This is
partly because the professional cartographer was the same
individual in both cases, but also, I would argue, because the
maps reflect performances of place, people, and genuineness
and therefore converge in style, scale, and the details that are
included: place names that reflect local histories, locations of
land-use activities within an area easily traversed by foot,
places of “cultural” significance.
The convergences we observe between these two sets of
maps (and with other community-based, ethnographic, participatory maps) also suggest another influence at work. Participatory mapping remains, in large part, a globalized practice
situated within rigid, unequal structures of power and knowledge. Very few mapping projects originate from the margins,
and even fewer are conducted exclusively by the local peoples

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

465

Figure 11. Section of final map presented to community leaders, Kumarakapay, Venezuela, February 2003. A color version of this figure is
available in the online edition.

whom this methodology is intended to serve. Rather, projects
originate in global arenas and are conducted under the guidance (and often in accordance with the interests of) national
or local elites. This does not deny the potential of this methodology to further territorial-rights claims or more genuine,
participatory approaches to conservation, community development, and other forms of community-based planning. But
it behooves practitioners to consider the ways in which participatory mapping is situated within local-global flows of
technology, identities, and imaginaries; how participatory
maps reflect the imprint of local-global relations of power;
and how such mapping projects produce spatialities that reflect both the material and the cultural constructed dimensions of postcolonial landscapes.
Ultimately, participatory mapping becomes something far
more complicated than a rational coming together of minds
to produce the “best” of all possible maps. Instead, because
maps are such desired objects, mapping workshops become
theaters for the performances of identities, the reading and
interpretation of histories, and the production of material and
imaginary landscapes that participants consider “theirs.”

Mapping is a performative practice in which individuals speak
and act their histories of landscapes and belonging, and
through these performances, they negotiate their relationships
with each other, with space, and with power. Ultimately, participatory mapping as performative practice provides a space
where political-economic structures and controls can be unmasked and participants may be enabled to exert a measure
of control over the multiple, contested meanings of indigeneity and authenticity.

Acknowledgments
The mapping project in the Gran Sabana was conducted from
July 2000 to April 2004 with a Fulbright-Hays dissertation
award, a Peace Studies Fellowship from the MacArthur Foundation, a National Science Foundation geography doctoral
dissertation research award (no. 0221324), and funding from
the Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies and the
Department of City and Regional Planning, Cornell University. My special thanks to Dr. Stanford Zent at the Instituto
Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas and the indigenous

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

466

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

deputy in the national assembly, Noeli Pocaterra, for their
assistance. My research in Trinidad was funded by an Oppenheimer Memorial Fellowship from the University of Kansas and a Pierre J. D. Stouse research grant from the Department of Geography, University of Kansas. This article was
written while I was a Mellon Graduate Fellow at the Cornell
Society for the Humanities, and it benefited from the comments of the Mellon Fellows. I wish to thank James Scott,
Nancy Peluso, Pauline von Hellerman, and five anonymous
reviewers for their invaluable comments; all omissions and
errors are mine alone.

Comments
Charles R. Hale
University of Texas at Austin; Centro de Investigaciones y
Estudios Superiores en Antropologı́a Social (CIESAS), Pacı́fico
Sur, Dr. Federico Ortiz Armengol 201, Colonia Reforma 68050,
Oaxaca, Mexico (crhale@mail.utexas.edu). 19 II 09
Bjørn Sletto’s article identifies and grapples with what could
be considered the next frontier in the interdisciplinary area of
scholarship known as “participatory mapping.” His argument
also applies to the broader realm of methodological innovation—known by various terms such as “activist,” “collaborative,” and “participatory-action” scholarship—to which participatory mapping belongs. Now that we have cleared some
ground—challenging the hierarchies and ingrained inequities
in conventional research methods, developing alternative practices that emphasize collaboration, dialogue, and horizontal
relations with the people who are the subjects of our research—
it is time to turn the lens inward, to scrutinize the complexities
and contradictions embedded in the new methods we have
developed. I use “we” advisedly here in that I have been engaged
in participatory-mapping projects for some time, and I also see
a great need for this kind of process-oriented internal critique
of these efforts. In this spirit of applauding Sletto’s work and
using it as inspiration to forge a parallel path for my own, I
raise four points of critical reflection.
First, I note a faint implicit “loss of innocence” trope, which
gets in the way of the article’s broader objectives. For example,
Sletto states that “participatory mapping becomes something
far more complicated than a rational coming together of
minds to produce the ‘best’ of all possible maps.” Who would
have thought otherwise, given that these maps are by design
interventions in power-laden fields and given that subordinated communities that make and deploy countermaps are
always shot through with multiple divisions, which at best
they manage to mediate in the interest of a provisional unity
in struggle? The challenging edge in Sletto’s argument, in my
reading, is not to have discovered these fault lines but to have
insisted on narrating them, striking the delicate balance be-

tween an ethical-political commitment to the community’s
struggle and a thoroughgoing internal critique of their efforts.
Sletto has done an impressive job of doing both, but it would
have been more convincing still had he replaced the loss-ofinnocence trope with more explicit reflection on how he reconciled these two partially contradictory goals.
Second, one element in this delicate balance not well represented here is countermapping as, in Sletto’s words, “a space
where political-economic structures and controls can be unmasked.” I agree completely with his focus on internal process, both how counterclaims for territory are constructed
and how constitutive inequities, such as gender, age, and economic position, shape this process. Yet one way to make sure
that this emphasis does not descend into self-referential cultural critique is to keep the broader contours of the struggle
front and center. These are present as the backdrop of Sletto’s
article, and such articles work better when they do not try to
accomplish too much. Still, especially given his goal of advancing a programmatic statement on the future of participatory mapping, I worry that Sletto has let the pendulum
swing to the other extreme, where the only power inequities
being unmasked are those within the community in struggle.
Third, given this sharp focus on internal inequities and
conflicts, I would have liked to hear more about how Sletto
himself enacted his role as activist geographer. The conflict
in the first case is less problematic: he was aligned from the
start with the traditional fisher folk, in tension with the trappers, and the resulting map reflected this positionality. But
in the second process, involving the Pemon, Sletto engaged
gender and age hierarchies in more complex ways, as
evidenced by his choice to highlight these facets in his ethnography. However, he does not fully explain how his own
countermapping methodology influenced these unfolding relations. For example, Sletto actively created spaces for Pemon
women and radicalized youth to participate in the mapmaking; but he also eventually decided to back off, so that the
maps that ultimately result reflect mainly the perspectives of
male elders. Greater (auto)ethnography of this dimension
would have furthered his basic goals of process-oriented analysis and, more important, would have allowed him to address
a common objection to this kind of activist research. Given
the pervasive internal inequities within “communities in
struggle,” the critics object, how can the activist scholar avoid
taking sides, which thereby elides these inequities? Sletto’s
experience seems to contain a convincing response to this
critique, but he does not fully share it with us.
Finally, in order to achieve even provisional closure, this
analysis of internal process needed to address the “afterlife”
question more directly. Once a countermap is produced, it
generally plays some role in the community’s struggle to
achieve territorial rights, and by extension, it also plays an
ongoing role in the internal relations of power and performance that Sletto narrates. This raises a pointed question: if,
for example, women or radicalized youth have a lesser voice
in the production of the countermap, does it follow that such

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

inequities will be reinforced as that map is put to use? A fuller
statement of Sletto’s programmatic vision for participatorymapping research would consider this question, balancing his
salutary call for attention to the process of mapmaking with
greater emphasis on what happens “after the map.”

Beth Rose Middleton
Department of Environmental Science and Policy,
University of California, Davis, 2132 Wickson Hall, One
Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, U.S.A.
(brmiddleton@ucdavis.edu). 6 II 09
Critical cartographers (e.g., Chambers 2006; Pickles 1995)
have long been encouraging reflexivity in participatory mapping. Sletto now calls on cartographers to develop this reflexivity specifically by devoting ethnographic attention to
“participatory-mapping workshops as theaters for the performance and negotiation of identities.” Focusing his ethnographic lens on the scale of the family and the community,
Sletto describes participatory mapping itself as “a performative practice in which individuals speak and act their histories of landscapes and belonging, and through these performances, they negotiate their relationships with each other,
with space, and with power.”
What new insights are gained from this designation of participatory mapping as “performative”? Like Tania Li (2000),
in her work on Lauje and Lindu identities in Indonesia, Sletto
examines the ways in which Pemon foreground indigeneity
to gain a particular type of legitimacy. However, while Sletto
looks at performativity in mapping, Li conceptualizes political
deployments of indigeneity as “positioning.” How does performativity as a concept productively differ from positioning
in the context of indigenous movements?
Sletto’s detailed descriptions of intra- and extravillage dynamics highlight the ways in which the different positionalities
of Pemon community members are embodied in the diversity
of Pemon maps. Focusing on the performance of mapping
as an important process within the Pemon community, Sletto
describes the ways in which women place elder men’s personal
interactions with the entire landscape above their own experiences, for example, and the ways youth see the land as a
hotly contested zone rather than as territory composed of a
series of traditional relationships. Sletto finds the process of
mapping vital for “what it had revealed about the entanglements of identities, social relations, landscape, and power in
places on the margins.” He seems most struck by the importance of this process for the researcher developing reflexivity in participatory mapping. I am left wondering how this
process affects social relations in the locality over time and
the ways the maps are ultimately used.
Like other critical cartographers (such as Wainwright and
Bryan 2009), Sletto is attentive to the influence of his own
presence. He writes, “As a social scientist, I was concerned
about reproducing the essentializing dichotomy between in-

467

digenous tradition and modernity; as an activist scholar, I was
aware that indigenous movements often obtain more influence when they employ primitivist imagery.” As a participatory cartographer, I take issue both with this point and with
Sletto’s use of the term “primitivist.” Rather than calling for
“primitivism,” the growing international environmentaljustice audience, for example, is attentive to indigenous people
whose livelihoods and identities are threatened by corporate
expansion. Cartographers need show not primitivism but an
ongoing history of struggle to maintain community and identity in the face of coloniality. Sletto’s juxtaposition of “indigenous tradition and modernity” is essentializing in itself and
denies the essential modernity of indigenous people advocating for traditional lands and recognition.
The risks of mapping are well known to participatory cartographers, so Sletto may be preaching to the choir with his
warning that “Making indigenous landscapes visible in new
material forms, such as maps, is a move fraught with risks,
raising complex questions about representation, appropriation, and dissemination.” This is particularly salient in 2009,
given the tone of emerging concerns over the México Indı́gena
project (Araujo 2009) and the responses to these concerns
(Dobson and Bird 2009). Perhaps the most impressive part
of Sletto’s article for the activist cartographer is his description
of having trained a dozen indigenous “ethnocartographers”
who were empowered by their new knowledge. Looking at
the ways in which these newly trained cartographers negotiate
“social relations” on the “new . . . materiality” of the map
offers a ripe opportunity to examine the researcher’s effect
on the community.
Using ethnographic methods enables Sletto to investigate
the diversity of spatial and cultural perceptions within Pemon
country and the structures of possibility that Pemon operate
within. Sletto shows convincingly that participatory mapping
is a process through which individual Pemon ethnocartographers “perform” place and culture. By including no fewer
than nine different versions of Pemon territory in the maps
throughout the article, Sletto does not allow one representation of Pemon space to dominate. Is including all of these
different Pemon maps convincingly antiessentialist? How does
it affect the struggle for territory that the Pemon are facing?
I am straying from Sletto’s focus on process rather than outcomes, but there would not be a process without a possibility
of an outcome. Sletto may need to martial more evidence to
convince critical, participatory, activist cartographers of the
value of understanding mapmaking as performative.

Anja Nygren
Environmental Science and Policy, Box 27, FI-00014
University of Helsinki, Finland (anja.nygren@helsinki.fi). 6
II 09
Bjørn Sletto’s analysis of the meanings and interpretations
involved in the events of participatory mapping as theaters

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

468

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

for the performance and negotiation of identities provides an
ethnographically rich and theoretically inspiring examination
of the struggles over knowledge and power occurring in participatory workshops. Sletto’s case studies of the participatory-mapping workshops in Trinidad and Venezuela offer
highly convincing examples of how categorical distinctions
between global forces and local resistance are too simple to
illustrate the hybridity of meanings and contestations involved
in participatory processes. This subject has rarely been tackled
in discussions on participatory approaches and thus warrants
a careful analysis.
Sletto’s call for a greater reflectiveness in the application
of participatory approaches is both relevant and challenging.
First, critical reflection is necessary for the theoretical revision
of the often taken-for-granted assumptions involved in participatory approaches to the harmonic dialogue between the
researcher and “those to be researched.” Second, careful reflection is necessary for the unveiling of the powerful policy
implications often embedded in participatory exercises.
Sletto’s thorough analysis of his own contradictory roles during participatory mapping provides an important reminder
of the ambiguous relations of knowledge and power involved
in any research project or human capacity–building program,
no matter how participatory their agendas might be.
Sletto’s analysis provides a sophisticated examination of the
multifaceted negotiations and contestations among the local
people on the “right” interpretation of the local landscape.
Sletto’s examples of gendered conceptions of the environment
provide important insights into the socially differentiated environmental knowledges within a society where “vision and
walking are privileged ways of knowing.” Equally interesting
are Sletto’s examples of how the Pemon elders challenged the
younger generations’ right to talk about and interpret the local
landscape. These examples clearly demonstrate how landscapes are always imbued with the histories, cultural rules,
and social relationships of the people living within them.
That said, Sletto’s analysis of the political economy of participatory processes could have been stronger. Although in
the beginning of the essay Sletto briefly observes that participatory approaches have been criticized for their dualistic approach to culture, power, and the locality, it would have been
interesting if he had analyzed these issues more carefully in
the light of his own ethnographic material. I strongly agree
with Sletto that the processes of talking about and drawing
landscapes can offer important forums for the revelation of
the uneven structures and relations of power that shape places
on the margins. However, the unveiling of such structures
does not yet mean that these structures will be changed.
In this respect, Sletto’s claims that participatory workshops
act as counterhegemonic activities or arenas for social agency
and political assessment for marginalized people might be
exaggerated. Although marginality does not eliminate social
agency, poor people’s lack of material resources and their
deeply felt experiences of marginalization constrain the forms
of agency available to them in multifaceted processes of ne-

gotiation (Bähre 2007; Cleaver 2005; Nygren 2004; Walsh
2005). Even after Sletto’s analysis, the reader is left in doubt
as to whether the Pemon performers themselves sincerely felt
that the participatory-mapping workshops provided them
with chances for actions “intended to change the world” or
whether this idea of participatory mapping as emancipatory
politics was instead one that the activist scholars themselves
wanted to believe in. The fact that all evidence of state intervention was ignored in the map selected as the official
representation of the Pemon landscape does not yet imply
that the state interventions in the locality will be eliminated
or decreased. As pointed out by Nygren and Rikoon (2008),
the changes in people’s environmental conceptions and in
their ways of interpreting the landscape do not automatically
lead to material changes in the landscapes or in the power
structures involved in the use and control of them.
Unfortunately, Sletto raises this issue only in the conclusion
of his essay, where he cleverly points out that the mapping
projects often originate in global arenas and are conducted
under the guidance and control of national or local elites,
thus reflecting the imprint of neocolonial power relations and
representations of landscapes. The constraints involved in the
participatory approaches’ efforts to increase the ability of marginalized people to reshape their lives and to reformulate their
living conditions deserved to be explored in greater detail in
Sletto’s otherwise brilliant analysis.
I completely agree with Sletto that participatory-mapping
workshops are “something far more complicated than a coming
together of minds to produce the ‘best’ of all possible maps.”
By providing a careful analysis of the negotiations and contestations involved in participatory-mapping workshops as theaters for the performances of identities and interpretations of
material and imaginary landscapes, Sletto provides a significant
theoretical and public policy contribution to anthropology and
other disciplines interested in participatory approaches.

Iokiñe Rodrı́guez
Department of Social Studies of Science, Venezuelan
Institute of Scientific Research (IVIC), Caracas, Venezuela
(iokirod@gmail.com/irodrigu@ivic.ve). 13 II 09
Participatory mapping is commonly used in Latin America
for the recognition of territorial rights, planning natural resource use, and analyzing/resolving land use conflicts. Despite
its increasing popularity, there is scant discussion about the
complexity of the mapping process. In this article, Sletto
makes an opportune contribution to this necessary discussion.
His work demonstrates that despite our good intentions to
strengthen, empower, or emancipate local communities in
their struggle for land, natural resource use, and cultural identity rights through self-demarcation projects, community
mapping projects are difficult to carry out, not so much because of resistance from the state, as is commonly the case

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

in our region, but because of the complex play of power
within communities.
The more novel aspect to Sletto’s account is not so much
the intricacies of community power relations but the few
revealing confessions he makes about how awkward, frustrated, and bewildered he felt with the level of local complexity
that he experienced in his mapping projects, particularly in
the Venezuelan one. I pick on this because I think that a
greater reflexivity in the application of participatory-mapping
projects, as urged by Sletto, also requires that we discuss how
demanding it can actually be for us as mapping practitioners,
activists, and researchers to work in these types of participatory encounters. Are we prepared to deal with local complexity? What type of researchers or mapping practitioners
does it take to be able to endure all the community tensions,
divisions, mistrust, misinterpretation, gossip, and occasionally
bad intentions that form part of these processes? This is something we seldom talk about, but it also requires close attention
if we want to be more realistic about community mapping.
I have known Sletto for about 10 years through our respective work in Venezuela with the Pemon, and I have known
about the mapping project he helped develop in the Gran
Sabana since its very beginnings. Despite all the difficulties
encountered and also some of the failures honestly acknowledged by Sletto, this is one of the most thorough and complete
experiences of land demarcation by indigenous people in Venezuela. But the project was finished at a great cost for Sletto.
Four years of his life were devoted to this project, requiring
all his patience, physical endurance, creativity, and dialogue/
negotiation skills. Not everybody has these skills, and this is
perhaps also a reason why not all community mapping projects succeed in helping local communities advance toward
self-determination.
This suggests that we ought to be thinking of acquiring
skills in addition to those received in conventional academic
training when deciding to undertake this type of endeavor. I
am thinking specifically of a minimal knowledge of conflict
resolution and customary forms of conflict management in
order to be able to deal with the tensions that arise when
facilitating participatory processes. No matter how respectful
and cautious one may be, conflicts will always arise in these
types of processes because that is what happens when people’s
views, interests, and values are negotiated. Thus, apart from
accepting the fact that conflicts are normal, we need to be
able to work through them without feeling frustrated or overwhelmed by local dissidence. Particularly if the mapping process is viewed as playing a role in shifting power relations, it
requires great commitment from external facilitators to help
the community overcome mistrust and engage in thorny discussions about identity, tradition, modernity, and the land.
Complexity itself is not as much of a problem as the fact
that it often takes us by surprise, hence the importance of
being prepared to deal with it. A change of focus in the
objective of participatory mapping could also help with this.
Rather than viewing participatory mapping mostly as a tool

469

to empower indigenous peoples and local communities in
their struggle for the land with “outside” actors, we should
start viewing it more seriously as a tool for internal deliberation and the clarification of local views. If we make this a
starting point instead of an accidental finishing point, we will
be able to play a better role in facilitating dialogue and deliberation when local dissidence arises. Having greater clarity
about their internal differences and their desired future will
also help indigenous people be in a stronger position to debate
development and territorial rights with the state and other
national elites.

Rick Schroeder
Center for African Studies and Department of Geography,
Rutgers University, 54 Joyce Kilmer Avenue, Piscataway,
New Jersey 08854-8045, U.S.A. (rschroed@rci.rutgers.edu).
7 II 09
Bjørn Sletto’s analysis of two participatory-mapping exercises
he led in Trinidad and Venezuela sheds fresh light on a set
of practices that have become increasingly widespread within
development circles over the past couple of decades. The cases
he describes originated in very different circumstances. The
first was launched, in Sletto’s own terms, with seemingly little
purpose other than to assist “an eager graduate student” in
his quest for a better understanding of the changing spatiality
of fishing and rice-growing practices in Trinidad’s Nariva
Swamp. The second, by contrast, was more explicitly “activist”
in its orientation. After recognition of indigenous land rights
in the new Venezuelan constitution, Sletto helped demarcate
the territories of several indigenous communities along the
Venezuela-Brazil border.
Sletto shares with his readers his surprise at the fact that
there seemed to be almost as much at stake for participants
in the more sterile academic exercise of mapping Nariva
Swamp as there was in the overtly political project of claiming
indigenous land rights in Venezuela. Despite their different
purposes, he found that each of his workshops was actually
used by his informants in very similar ways. Unbeknown to
Sletto at the time, the Nariva Swamp was home to a simmering controversy between different factions using widely
divergent techniques for capturing fish in the swamp. It was
also the subject of escalating concern by environmentalists
opposed to large-scale commercial rice plantations being established there. In effect, both the Trinidadian and the Venezuelan workshops Sletto ran were converted by his research
informants into venues for the performance and assertion of
identity and authenticity claims.
I would like to raise just two brief points in response to
Sletto’s thoughtful and provocative essay. The fact that mapping
workshops should be manipulated by locals for political purposes is not at all surprising to me. In my own experience as
a development worker before entering the academy, I found
myself constantly in play by opposing factions engaged in per-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

470

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

formances analogous to those described by Sletto. The same
was true when I eventually took to the field as a researcher.
Despite my careful disclaimers, informants often seemed to
harbor sneaking suspicions that I was somehow hiding what
was really at stake in my research that there were unacknowledged benefits to be had, provided that informants played along
with my requests for seemingly esoteric information. The proliferation of community-based mapping exercises and other
forms of rapid and participatory rural appraisal has meant that
locals have become increasingly shrewd and skilled in shaping
development agendas to suit their own purposes, hence, the
performative nature of their involvement.
Sletto does a nice job of demonstrating that the mapping
workshops constitute an important step in the “process of
place making.” He also reminds us, however, that the workshops themselves cannot fully realize the political goals of
participants. One of the teenage mapmakers in Venezuela
frames the issue succinctly: “So after this,” he asks, “are they
going to give us the land?” His friend replies vaguely: “No,
first Bjørn is going to bring the maps to the United States.”
And then? Sletto’s analysis makes clear that while the workshop may be a venue for the performance of identity and
authenticity, the political goals and aspirations motivating
such performances require second acts. It is not enough to
make sure that the map is filled all the way to the “corners.”
If the broader aims of workshop participants are to be met,
the territories represented on the map must be filled with acts
of tree cutting and planting, cattle grazing, and fishing. In
order for the visions and imagination reflected in the maps
to gain political currency, then, they must be combined with
deliberate political and legal strategies. These acts of map
realization warrant further attention.

Astrid Ulloa
Departamento de Geografı́a, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Bogotá, Ciudad Universitaria carrera 45 No.
26–85, Bogotá, Colombia (eaulloac@unal.edu.co). 7 II 09
Community-based mapping has been analyzed in its different
political uses and as recognition of the collective territorial
rights of indigenous peoples. In the past few decades, indigenous mapping has also been part of the reconfiguration of
the national territories of Latin American countries that has
allowed new ideas of territory, identities, rights, and concepts
to emerge that are related to national and local management
of symbolic and physical space (Ariza, Chavarro, and Vargas
1999; Offen 2006). Sletto’s article is an important contribution to the discussion of participatory mapping, and he proposes new insights in the way it can be used. He points out
that the process of making maps is related to inner expressions
and cultural representations of the landscape related to
dreams, fears, desires, and fantasies, which allow the construction of individual or collective identities. Sletto also argues that participatory mapping is related to performances

of spatial appropriations that connect the past, present, and
future and evoke cultural referents that go beyond the known
territory. Finally, Sletto proposes participatory mapping as a
generator and propagator of spatialities related to memory
that has the potential of reinforcing emancipatory politics.
Sletto’s perspective is very interesting. However, as he notes,
maps not only are tools but also are related to symbolism
and processes that most of the time make sense only for the
people who are involved. Since the seventies, social cartography, as it is called in Latin America, has been used as part
of participatory-action research, and it has been very important for indigenous peoples’ demands related to their collective rights, but it does not appear in the genealogies of participatory mapping or in academic reports. I want to highlight
the case of the so-called talking maps (mapas parlantes). These
maps are big representations (murals) of Nasa people’s territory in Cauca, Colombia. Six in total, they represent the
historical transformations of specific places and the impact
of colonial, republican, and modern state policies in the Nasa’s
territory. They also represent the resistance and the territorial
politics of the Nasa people. These maps were made in the
seventies by Victor Daniel Bonilla, the Nasa people, and intellectuals who were involved with indigenous resistance
movements (Bonilla and Fidji 1986). The mapas parlantes
have been used in collective processes of memory recovery
because they enable the flow of memories, experiences, and
processes that articulate territorial dimensions concerning
physical, historical, socioeconomic, political, and cultural
practices embodied in specific places. They also facilitate the
comparative analysis of local transformations over time.
Sletto’s article goes in this direction but does not fully develop
the role of representations in collective processes. Talking
maps put into circulation thoughts, ideas, and historical processes that are tied to specific locations. These maps are still
used in educational processes to analyze the current problems
of the Nasa people’s territorial management. A look at the
role of these maps would be useful for the discussion presented by Sletto, and, similarly, it would allow him to trace
the genealogy of participatory mapping in Latin America.
Another approach that Sletto proposes with maps is their
relationship with art, which he unfortunately does not explore
enough. I believe that the maps are linked to intricate aesthetic
dimensions because the systems of representation—especially
interwoven indigenous knowledges, practices, and concepts—
establish a dialogue with their environment in specific moments and places. When indigenous peoples represent their
territory, they participate in the construction of their world
perspectives and ways of conceiving different notions of space.
In this process, they overlay different images (sounds, graphics, movements, and tastes) that collectively feed and interact
with local-global cultural representations. Alternative ways of
representing the cultural and territorial space (e.g., the body
as territory or basketry as articulator of memory processes)
that are very common among indigenous peoples have to be
explored in order to locate new notions of spatialities. How-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

ever, Sletto takes up the conventions and forms of formal
mapping (which considers a space of representation in two
dimensions), through a process of teaching and training ethnocartographers, without discussing their cultural implications.
Nevertheless, Sletto rethinks social mapping by connecting
space with identity and with the circulation of meaning that
is generated when maps are constructed, as in the cases of
Trinidad and the indigenous Pemon of Venezuela; this work
integrates social mapping and reshapes the role of maps. The
interesting thing about Sletto’s article is that he is not trying
to argue the role of maps as a political strategy in itself (land
recovery, environmental management, resolution of territorial
conflicts, or representing inequalities). On the contrary, he
perceives participatory maps as generators of spatial dynamics, which may be a strategy of resistance, in the sense of
allowing a group to rework their identities and experiences
embedded in both individual and collective practices that
inhabit specific places.

Reply
I much appreciate the thorough readings and thoughtful reflections by Hale, Middleton, Nygren, Rodrı́guez, Schroeder,
and Ulloa, who have called for further “autoethnography”
and discussions of the outcomes and consequences of the
mapping projects—the “second acts,” to paraphrase Schroeder—both within the communities and from the perspective
of broader relations of power in which these communities are
situated. Perhaps the way to start is to consider Middleton’s
question whether what is going on in these participatorymapping workshops would be better understood as “positioning” rather than “performativity.” This question lies at
the very heart of the argument being made here, that is, that
it behooves practitioners of “participatory mapping” and
other “social mappings” to reflect more critically on the social
processes that inform and are constituted by such mapmaking
processes. The concept of “performativity,” I would argue,
more accurately captures the ways in which the interests of
different community members are wrapped up in, even subsumed within, culturally and geographically contingent practices of storytelling. By contrast with the more instrumentalist
concept of “positioning” (to achieve certain ends), “performativity” allows us to unpack the ways in which the expression of interests is beholden to different rights to speak of
landscapes and histories, the ways in which this “speakingof” is associated with the speaker’s embodiment in and of
landscapes, and the ways in which this embodiment is entangled in complex, multidimensional ways of representing
time and place, that is, what Ulloa refers to as the “body as
territory or basketry as articulator of memory processes.” As
I understand and use the term, “performativity,” coupled with

471

the concept of maps as art, offers a productive metaphor for
such process analysis, especially because I have argued (perhaps not convincingly) that process is also action (in the sense
that art and speaking also are “action”). Hence, the process
of participatory mapping in and by itself leads to and is shaped
by multiple strategies of resistance “in the sense of allowing
a group to rework their identities and experiences embedded
in both individual and collective practices that inhabit specific
places” (Ulloa).
Of course, this does not adequately answer the question of
what happened next, especially regarding the Pemon in Venezuela. Many of the complexities of meanings of landscapes,
time, and identities were lost as these performances were reduced to two-dimensional cartographic products. The dilemmas I faced as I alternatively led and was pulled along by this
reductionist process have been the focus of my essay. What
I have not made clear are the numerous decisions I made
every day as I was alternatively manipulated (Schroeder), cajoled, prompted, and otherwise influenced—not only by community members, it is important to note, but also by multiple
actors in government, NGOs, and the Venezuelan and U.S.
academies. As Rodrı́guez observes, critical cartographers may
consider participatory mapping more seriously as a tool for
internal deliberation and the clarification of local views.
Especially significant, as Hale points out, was the balancing
act I followed to meet my activist commitment to the community while still pursuing what he refers to as my “internal
critique.” Perhaps the best (but nonetheless unsatisfactory)
comment I can make here is that I came to believe that critical
reflection of process, baring the complex articulations between shifting meanings of place, time, and indigeneity that
characterize the “essential modernity of indigenous people advocating for traditional lands and recognition” (Middleton),
would take us away from the trap of essentializing indigenous
peoples through our representations of indigenous cartographies. The more my Pemon colleagues and confidants
themselves reflected openly on their complex productions of
identities and meanings of place and time, the more apparent
it became to me that the mapping process was informed by
a broader struggle, that their agency was exercised in multiple
ways—not merely through the mapping project—and that
this agency deserved further analysis.
Not that this observation obviates further discussion about
the consequences and outcomes of the mapping project—as
Hale remarks, “if, for example, women or radicalized youth
have a lesser voice in the production of the countermap, does
it follow that such inequities will be reinforced as that map
is put to use?” (Hale). Middleton similarly asks how the training of the “ethnocartographers” might have changed power
relations in the communities. Such questions are indeed essential for critical geographers; given the limited space here,
another short and limited answer is that for the Pemon, the
mapping project was, as I alluded to above, one of multiple,
ongoing, more or less consequential engagements with Venezuelan modernity, Western technologies, and non-Pemon

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

472

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

authorities, and that as such, the mapping process represented
one of many ways in which they could articulate their claims
to land and rights to cultural particularity within the Venezuelan state formation. These are communities defined in part
by their complex appropriations of modernity, and as such,
the social processes surrounding the mapping project became
part and parcel of these ongoing social changes.
So did the “Pemon performers themselves sincerely [feel]
that the participatory-mapping workshops provided them
with chances for actions ‘intended to change the world’” (Nygren)? There is no yes-or-no answer to this question, of
course, but Nygren’s observation points to the need for critical, participatory cartographers to combine such projects
with deliberate political and legal strategies, to use Schroeder’s
words. As I discuss in the article, the mapping project began
shortly after the passage of the new Venezuelan constitution,
which explicitly and for the first time provided for indigenous
collective land rights, and the mapping methodology was designed to meet the requirements and language of the subsequent law of indigenous territorial demarcation. Of course,
some of the optimism we felt during the project has now
waned; since the mapping project concluded in 2004, Pemon
leaders have been stymied in their attempts to claim their
land rights because of the inconsistent and shifting requirements for land legalization emerging from the national commission for indigenous land demarcation.
At the risk of glib oversimplification, perhaps this delay in
securing land rights ultimately underscores the importance
of carefully designing and critiquing process in order to ensure
that such mapping projects contribute to ongoing struggles,
whether or not immediate political gains are achieved. In the
case of the Gran Sabana, the ethnocartographers and other
community members closely involved with the mapping project have continued, in a variety of ways, to work on mapmaking in Pemon communities and to press their claims with
the demarcation commission, drawing on both the technical
and the deliberative lessons learned from the mapping project.
Terms such as “capacity building” and “empowerment” do
not fit easily in the vocabulary of critical cartographers, but
by all appearances, action in the form of performances of
place, time, and identities are continuing in the Gran Sabana,
drawing on the agency that shaped the mapping project from
the beginning but also informed by new representational tools
and strategies introduced via the mapping project.
—Bjørn Ingmunn Sletto

References Cited
Agrawal, A. 1995. Dismantling the divide between indigenous
and scientific knowledge. Development and Change 26:
413–439.
Anderson, Ben. 1991. Imagined communities. Rev. edition.
New York: Verso.
Appadurai, Arjun. 1992. Global ethnoscapes: notes and que-

ries for a transnational anthropology. In Recapturing anthropology: working in the present. Richard Fox, ed. Pp.
123–137. Advanced Seminar Series. Santa Fe, NM: School
of American Research Press.
———. 1995. The production of locality. In Counterworks:
managing the diversity of knowledge. Richard Fardon, ed.
Pp. 204–225. New York: Routledge.
Araujo, Saulo. 2009. Zapotec indigenous people in Mexico
demand transparency from U.S. scholar. http://news
.infoshop.org/article.php?storyp
20090127223927685. [BRM]
Ariza, Eduardo, Mauricio Chavarro, and Patricia Vargas. 1999.
Paisajes vividos y paisajes observados: la percepción territorial en la zonificación ecológica del pacı́fico colombiano.
Bogotá: Ministerio del Medio Ambiente–Instituto Geográfico Agustı́n Codazzi–Proyecto zonificación ecológica de
la región pacı́fica colombiana. [AU]
Bacon, Peter. 1990. Ecology and management of swamp forest
in the Guianas and Caribbean region. In Ecosystems of the
world: forested wetlands. A. Lugo, ed. Pp. 213–250. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bähre, Eric. 2007. Reluctant solidarity: death, urban poverty
and neighbourly assistance in South Africa. Ethnography
8(1):33–59. [AN]
Baptiste, April. 2008. Evaluating environmental awareness: a
case study of the Nariva Swamp, Trinidad. PhD dissertation, Syracuse University.
Barth, Fredrik. 1995. Other knowledge and other ways of
knowing. Journal of Anthropological Research 5(1):65–68.
———, ed. 1969. Ethnic groups and boundaries. Boston:
Little, Brown.
Benjamin, Walter. 1968. Illuminations. New York: Schocken.
Bonilla, Vı́ctor Daniel, and Marı́a Teresa Fidji. 1986. En el
camino de la investigación acción solidaria: la invención
de los mapas parlantes y su utilización como herramienta
de educación. Cali: Fundación Colombia Nuestra. [AU]
Bourgois, Philippe. 1997. Confronting the ethics of ethnography: lessons from fieldwork in Central America. In Decolonizing anthropology: moving further toward an anthropology for liberation. Faye Harrison, ed. Pp. 111–127.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Brereton, Bridget. 1974. The experience of indentureship:
1845–1917. In Calcutta to Caroni: the East Indians of Trinidad. John Gaffar La Guerre, ed. Pp. 25–37. London: Longman Caribbean.
———. 1981. A history of modern Trinidad, 1783–1962. London: Heinemann Educational.
———. 1993. Social organisation and class, racial and cultural
conflict in 19th century Trinidad. In Trinidad ethnicity.
Kevin Yelvington, ed. Pp. 33–55. Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press.
Brosius, Peter. 1997. Endangered forest, endangered people:
environmentalist representations of indigenous knowledge.
Human Ecology 25:47–69.
———. 1999. Analyses and interventions: anthropological

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

engagements with environmentalism. Current Anthropology 40(3):277–309.
———. 2001. Local knowledges, global claims: on the significance of indigenous ecologies in Sarawak, East Malaysia.
In Indigenous traditions and ecology. J. Grim and L. Sullivan, eds. Pp. 125–157. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press and Center for the Study of World Religions.
Brosius, Peter, Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, and Charles Zerner,
eds. 2005. Communities and conservation: histories and
politics of community-based natural resource management.
Lanham, MD: Altamira.
Butt-Colson, A. 1985. Routes of knowledge: an aspect of regional integration in the circum-Roraima area of the Guiana Highlands. Antropológica 63–64:103–149.
Carter, G. S., and L. S. Beadle. 1932. The fauna of the swamps
of the Paraguayan Chaco in relation to its environment. II.
Respiratory adaptations of the fishes. Journal of the Linnean Society of London, Zoology 37:327–368.
Chambers, Robert. 2006. Participatory mapping and GIS.
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing
Countries 25(2):1–11. [BRM]
Chapin, Mac, Zachary Lamb, and Bill Threlkeld. 2005. Mapping indigenous lands. Annual Review of Anthropology 34:
619–638.
Chapin, Mac, and Bill Threlkeld. 2001. Indigenous landscapes:
a study in ethnocartography. Arlington, VA: Center for the
Support of Native Lands.
Clarke, Colin. 1993. Spatial pattern and social interaction
among Creoles and Indians in Trinidad and Tobago. In
Trinidad ethnicity. Kevin Yelvington, ed. Pp. 116–135.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Cleaver, Frances. 2005. The inequality of social capital and
the reproduction of chronic poverty. World Development
33(6):893–906. [AN]
Connerton, Paul. 1989. How societies remember. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cosgrove, Denis. 1984. Social formation and symbolic landscape. Sydney: Croom Helm.
Cousins, Andrew. 1991. La frontera étnica Pemon y el impacto
socio-economico de la mineria de oro. PhD dissertation,
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciónes Cientı́ficas, Caracas.
Crampton, Jeremy. 2001. Maps as social constructions: power,
communication and visualization. Progress in Human Geography 25(2):235–252.
De Armellada, Cesareo. 1943. Gramática y diccionario de la
lengua pemón (arekuna, taurepán, kamarakoto) (familia
Caribe) por el r. p. Cesáreo de Armellada. Caracas: C. A.
Artes Gráficas.
Dobson, Jerome E., and Mary Lynne Bird. 2009. The American
Geographical Society: developing guidelines for ethical conduct of foreign field research. http://web.ku.edu/˜mexind/
clear_up_misconceptions.htm. [BRM]
Duncan, James, and David Ley, eds. 1993. Place/culture/representation. London: Routledge.

473

Eriksen, Thomas Hylland. 1990. Liming in Trinidad: the art
of doing nothing. Folk 32:23–43.
———. 1993. Ethnicity and nationalism. Boulder, CO: Pluto.
Escobar, Arturo. 2001. Culture sits in places: reflections on
globalism and subaltern strategies of localization. Political
Geography 20:139–174.
Fox, J. 1998. Mapping the commons: the social context of
spatial information technologies. Common Property Resource Digest 45:1–4.
Fox, J., K. Suryanata, P. Hershock, and A. Pramono. 2005.
Mapping power: ironic effects of spatial information technology. In Mapping communities: ethics, values, practice.
J. Fox, K. Suryanata, and P. Hershock, eds. Pp. 1–10. Honolulu: East-West Center.
Fox, J., P. Yonzon, and N. Podger. 1996. Mapping conflicts
between biodiversity and human needs in Langtang National Park. Conservation Biology 10(2):562–569.
Geismar, Haidy, and Christopher Tilley. 2003. Negotiating
materiality: international and local museum practices at the
Vanuatu Cultural Centre and National Museum. Oceania
73:170–188.
Gell, Alfred. 1998. Art and agency: an anthropological theory.
New York: Clarendon.
Gordon, Edmund, Galio Gurdián, and Charles Hale. 2003.
Rights, resources, and the social memory of struggle: reflections on a study of indigenous and black community
land rights on Nicaragua’s Atlantic coast. Human Organization 62(4):369–381.
Gupta, Akhil. 1998. Postcolonial developments: agriculture in
the making of modern India. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Gupta, Akhil, and James Ferguson. 1997. Discipline and practice: “the field” as site, method, and location in anthropology. In Anthropological locations: boundaries and
grounds of a field science. Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson,
eds. Pp. 1–46. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Haley, Brian, and Larry Wilcoxon. 1997. Anthropology and
the making of Chumash tradition. Current Anthropology
38(5):761–794.
Harley, J. B. 1988. Maps, knowledge, and power. In The iconography of landscape: essays on the symbolic representation, design, and use of past environments. D. Cosgrove
and S. Daniels, eds. Pp. 277–312. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 1989. Deconstructing the map. Cartographica 26:
1–20.
———. 1990. Cartography, ethics, and social theory. Cartographica 27:1–23.
———. 1992. Deconstructing the map. In Writing worlds:
discourse, text and metaphor in the representation of landscape. T. Barnes and J. Duncan, eds. Pp. 231–247. London:
Routledge.
Harris, Trevor, and Dan Weiner. 1998. Empowerment, marginalization and community-integrated GIS. Cartography
and Geographic Information Systems 25(2):67–76.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

474

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

Henry, Ralph M. 1993. Notes on the evolution of inequality
in Trinidad and Tobago. In Trinidad ethnicity. Kevin Yelvington, ed. Pp. 56–80. Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press.
Herlihy, Peter. 2003. Participatory research mapping of indigenous lands in Darién, Panama. Human Organization
62(4):315–331.
Herlihy, Peter, and Gregory Knapp. 2003. Maps of, by, and
for the peoples of Latin America. Human Organization
62(4):303–314.
Herlihy, Peter, and Andrew Leake. 1997. Participatory research mapping of indigenous lands in the Honduran Mosquitia. In Demographic diversity and change in the Central
American isthmus. Anne Pebley and Luis Rosero-Bixby,
eds. Pp. 707–736. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.
Hobsbawm, Eric. 1983. Introduction: inventing traditions. In
The invention of tradition. Eric Hobsbawm and Terence
Ranger, eds. Pp. 1–15. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hodgson, D., and R. Schroeder. 2002. Dilemmas of countermapping community resources in Tanzania. Development
and Change 33(1):79–100.
Hornborg, Alf. 1994. Environmentalism, ethnicity and sacred
places: reflections on modernity, discourse and power. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 31(3):
245–267.
Huber, Otto. 1995. Geographical and physical features. In
Flora of the Venezuelan Guayana, vol. 1. Paul Berry, Bruce
Holst, and Kay Yatskievych, eds. Pp. 1–61. St. Louis: Missouri Botanical Gardens.
Ingold, Tim. 1993. The temporality of the landscape. World
Archeology 25(2):152–174.
Kassam, Karim, and Sean Maher. 2000. Indigenous, Cartesian,
and cartographic: visual metaphors of knowledge in arctic
(tundra) and sub-arctic (taiga) communities. In Links between cultures and biodiversity: proceedings of the Cultures
and Biodiversity Congress. Xu Jianchu, ed. Pp. 785–811.
Kunming: Yunnan Science and Technology Press.
Kingsbury, Nancy. 1999. Increasing pressure on declining resources: a case study of Pemon Amerindian shifting cultivation in the Gran Sabana, Venezuela. PhD dissertation,
York University, Toronto.
Kirsch, Stuart. 2007. Indigenous movements and the risks of
counterglobalization: tracking the campaign against Papua
New Guinea’s Ok Tedi mine. American Ethnologist 34(2):
303–321.
Koch-Grunberg, Theodor. 1981. Del Roraima al Orinoco.
Frederica de Ritter, trans. Caracas: Armatano.
Li, Tania Murray. 2000. Articulating indigenous identity in
Indonesia: resource politics and the tribal slot. Comparative
Studies in Society and History 42(1):149–179. [BRM]
Mansutti, Alexander. 1981. Penetración y cambio social entre
los Akawaio y Pemon. PhD dissertation, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciónes Cientı́ficas, Caracas.
Milton, Kay. 1996. Environmentalism and cultural theory:

exploring the role of anthropology in environmental discourse. London: Routledge.
Monmonier, Mark. 1991. How to lie with maps. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Moore, H. 1996. The changing nature of anthropological
knowledge: an introduction. In The future of anthropological knowledge. H. Moore, ed. Pp. 1–15. London: Routledge.
Morphy, Howard. 1994. The interpretation of ritual: reflections from film on anthropological practice. Man, n.s.,
29(1):117–147.
Myer, L. 1998. Biodiversity conservation and indigenous
knowledge: rethinking the role of anthropology. Indigenous
Knowledge and Development Monitor 6 (1). http://www
.iss.nl/ikdm/IKDM/IKDM/6-1/myer.html.
Myers, Fred. 1994. Culture-making: performing aboriginality
at the Asia Society Gallery. American Ethnologist (21)4:
679–699.
———. 2004. Ontologies of the image and economies of
exchange. American Ethnologist 31(1):5–20.
Nader, Laura. 1996. Introduction: anthropological inquiry into
boundaries, power, and knowledge. In Naked science: anthropological inquiry into boundaries, power, and knowledge. Laura Nader, ed. Pp. 1–68. New York: Routledge.
Nygren, Anja. 1999. Local knowledge in the environmentdevelopment discourse. Critique of Anthropology 19(3):
267–288.
———. 2004. Contested lands and incompatible images: the
political ecology of struggles over resources in Nicaragua’s
Indio-Maı́z reserve. Society and Natural Resources 17(3):
189–205. [AN]
Nygren, Anja, and Sandy Rikoon. 2008. Political ecology revisited: integration of politics and ecology does matter. Society and Natural Resources 21(9):767–782. [AN]
Offen, Karl. 2003. Narrating place and identity, or mapping
Miskitu land claims in northeastern Nicaragua. Human
Organization 62(4):382–392.
———. 2006. La nueva polı́tica geográfica indı́gena y negra
en América Latina. In Conferencias en geografı́a. Luis Carlos Jiménez-Reyes, ed. Pp. 37–64. Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de Colombia. [AU]
Okafor, Chinyere Grace. 1994. From the heart of masculinity:
Ogbodo-Uke women’s masking (women as oral artists).
Research in African Literatures 25(3):7–18.
Orlove, Ben. 1991. Mapping reeds and reading maps: the
politics of representation in Lake Titicaca. American Ethnologist 18(1):3–38.
———. 1993. The ethnography of maps: the cultural and
social contexts of cartographic representation in Peru. Cartographica 30(1):29–46.
Peluso, Nancy. 1995. Whose woods are these? counter-mapping forest territories in Kalimantan, Indonesia. Antipode
4:383–406.
Pickles, John, ed. 1995. Ground truth: the social implications
of geographic information systems. New York: Guilford.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Sletto Participatory Mapping

———. 2004. A history of spaces: cartographic reason, mapping, and the geo-coded world. New York: Routledge.
Poole, Peter. 1995. Indigenous peoples, mapping, and biodiversity conservation: an analysis of current activities and
opportunities for applying geomatics technologies. Landover, MD: Biodiversity Support Program.
Ramnarie, I. W. 1994. Larval culture, development and growth
of the cascadu, Hoplosternum littorale (Hancock 1828; Callichthyidae). Aquaculture 126:291–298.
Rocheleau, D. 2005. Maps as power tools: locating “communities” in space or situating people(s) and ecologies in
place? In Communities and conservation: histories and politics of community-based natural resource management. P.
Brosius, A. Tsing, and C. Zerner, eds. Pp. 327–362. Lanham,
MD: Altamira.
Rocheleau, D., and L. Ross. 1995. Trees as tools, trees as text:
struggles over resources in Zambrana-Chacuey, Dominican
Republic. Antipode 27:407–429.
Rodrı́guez, Iokiñe. 2004. Conocimiento indı́gena vs. cientı́fico: el conflicto por el uso del fuego en el Parque Nacional
Canaima, Venezuela. Interciencia 29(3):121–129.
———. 2007. Pemon perspectives of fire management in
Canaima National Park, southeastern Venezuela. Human
Ecology 35:331–343.
Rose, Deborah. 2000. To dance with time: a Victoria River
Aboriginal study. Australian Journal of Anthropology
11(3):287–296.
Roth, Robin. 2004. Spatial organization of environmental
knowledge: conservation conflicts in the inhabited forest
of northern Thailand. Ecology and Society 9(3):5, http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss3/art5.
Rundstrom, Robert. 1990. A cultural interpretation of Inuit
map accuracy. Geographical Review 80(2):155–168.
———. 1991. Mapping, postmodernism, indigenous people
and the changing direction of North American cartography.
Cartographica 28:1–12.
———. 1993. The role of ethics, mapping, and the meaning
of place in relations between Indians and whites in the
United States. Cartographica 30:21–28.
Samoff, J., and N. Stromquist. 2001. Managing knowledge
and storing wisdom? new forms of foreign aid? Development and Change 32:631–656.
Scott, James. 1999. Seeing like a state. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Sillitoe, P. 1998. The development of indigenous knowledge:
a new applied anthropology. Current Anthropology 39(2):
223–252.
Singh, K. 1974. East Indians and the larger society. In Calcutta
to Caroni. J. G. La Guerre, ed. Pp. 39–68. London: Longman Caribbean.
Sletto, Bjørn. 1998. Fish, rice and the meaning of place: the
political ecology of the Nariva Swamp, Trinidad. Caribbean
Geography 9:14–29.
———. 2002. Boundary-making and regional identities in a
local-global space: debordering the Nariva Swamp, Trini-

475

dad. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 20:
183–208.
———. 2005. A swamp and its subjects: conservation politics,
surveillance and resistance in Trinidad, the West Indies.
Geoforum 36(1):77–93.
———. 2006. Burn marks: the becoming and unbecoming
of an indigenous landscape. PhD dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca.
———. 2008. The knowledge that counts: institutional identities, policy science, and the conflict over fire management
in the Gran Sabana, Venezuela. World Development 36:
1938–1955.
Stocks, Anthony. 2003. Mapping dreams in Nicaragua’s Bosawas Reserve. Human Organization 62(4):344–356.
Stoller, Paul. 1994a. Embodying colonial memories. American
Anthropologist 96(3):634–648.
———. 1994b. Ethnographies as texts/ethnographers as
griots. American Ethnologist 21(2):353–366.
———. 1996. Spaces, places, and fields: the politics of West
African trading in New York City’s informal economy.
American Anthropologist, n.s., 98(4):776–788.
———. 2004. Sensuous ethnography, African persuasions,
and social knowledge. Qualitative Inquiry 10(6):817–835.
Sundberg, Juanita. 2004. Identities in the making: conservation, gender, and race in the Maya biosphere reserve, Guatemala. Gender, Place and Culture 11(1):43–66.
Taylor, John P. 2003. The story of Jimmy: the practice of
history on North Pentecost, Vanuatu. Oceania 73:243–259.
Thomas, David. 1982. Order without government: the society
of the Pemon Indians of Venezuela. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.
Tilley, Christopher. 1996. The power of rocks: topography
and monument construction on Bodmin Moor. World Archeology 28(2):161–176.
Toledo Maya Cultural Council. 1997. Maya atlas: the struggle
to preserve Maya land in southern Belize. Berkeley: North
Atlantic Books.
Trigger, David, and Jane Mulcock. 2005. Forests as spiritually
significant places: nature, culture, and “belonging” in Australia. Australian Journal of Anthropology 16(3):306–320.
Turner, Terence. 1997. Human rights, human difference: anthropology’s contribution to an emancipatory cultural politics. Journal of Anthropological Research 53(3):273–292.
Ulloa, Astrid. 2005. Las representaciones sobre los indı́genas
en los discursos ambientales y de desarrollo sostenible. In
Polı́ticas de economı́a, ambiente y sociedad en tiempos de
globalización. Daniel Mato, ed. Pp. 89–109. Caracas: Facultad de Ciencias Económicas y Sociales, Universidad Central de Venezuela.
Urbina, Luis Alfredo. 1979. Adaptacion ecologico-cultural de
los Pemon-Arekuna: el caso de Tuauken. PhD dissertation,
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciónes Cientı́ficas, Caracas.
Vertovec, S. 1990. Oil boom and recession in Trinidad Indian
villages. In South Asians overseas: migration and ethnicity.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

476

Current Anthropology Volume 50, Number 4, August 2009

C. Clark, C. Peach, and S. Vertovec, eds. Pp. 89–111. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1992. Hindu Trinidad: religion, ethnicity and socioeconomic change. London: Macmillan Caribbean.
Wainwright, Joel, and Joe Bryan. 2009. Cartography, territory,
property: postcolonial reflections on indigenous countermapping in Nicaragua and Belize. Cultural Geographies 16:
153–178. [BRM]
Walker, Peter, and Pauline Peters. 2001. Maps, metaphors and
meanings: boundary struggles and village forest use on pri-

vate and state land in Malawi. Society and Natural Resources 14:411–424.
Walsh, Andrew. 2005. The obvious aspects of ecological underprivilege in Ankarana, northern Madagascar. American
Anthropologist 107(4):654–665. [AN]
Weller, J. A. 1968. The East Indian indenture in Trinidad. Rio
Pedras: Institute of Caribbean Studies, University of Puerto
Rico.
Wood, Denis. 1992. The power of maps. New York: Guilford.
———. 1993. Maps and mapmaking. Cartographica 30:1–6.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 08:03:30 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

