Current Anthropology

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

327

Zoon Politikon
The Evolutionary Origins of Human Political Systems
by Herbert Gintis, Carel van Schaik, and Christopher Boehm
We provide the most up-to-date evidence available in various behavioral ﬁelds in support of the hypothesis that the
emergence of bipedalism and cooperative breeding in the hominin line—together with environmental developments that made a diet of meat from large animals adaptive as well as cultural innovation in the form of ﬁre and
cooking—created a niche for hominins in which there was a high return for coordinated, cooperative scavenging
and hunting of large mammals. This was accompanied by an increasing use of wooden spears and lithic points as
lethal hunting weapons that transformed human sociopolitical life. The combination of social interdependence and
the availability of such weapons in early hominin society undermined the standard social dominance hierarchy of
multimale/multifemale primate groups. The successful sociopolitical structure that ultimately replaced the ancestral
social dominance hierarchy was an egalitarian political system in which lethal weapons made possible group control
of leaders, and group success depended on the ability of leaders to persuade and of followers to contribute to a
consensual decision process. The heightened social value of nonauthoritarian leadership entailed enhanced biological ﬁtness for such leadership traits as linguistic facility, ability to form and inﬂuence coalitions, and, indeed, hypercognition in general.

Overview
This paper deploys the most up-to-date evidence available in
various behavioral ﬁelds in support of the hypothesis that the
emergence of bipedalism and cooperative breeding in the hominin line—together with environmental developments that
made a diet of meat from large animals adaptive as well as
cultural innovations in the form of ﬁre, cooking, and lethal
weapons—created a niche for hominins in which there was a
signiﬁcant advantage to individuals with the ability to communicate and persuade. These forces added a unique political dimension to human social life that, through gene-culture
coevolution, became a human mental capacity intentionally
to construct and reconstruct the social order. Homo sapiens
became, in the words of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (2002
[350 BC]), a zoon politikon.
Strong social interdependence plus the availability of lethal
weapons in early hominin society undermined the standard
social dominance hierarchy, based on pure physical prowess,
Herbert Gintis is External Professor at the Santa Fe Institute (1399
Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501, U.S.A. [hgintis@
comcast.net]). Carel van Schaik is Professor of Biological Anthropology at the University of Zurich and Director of the Anthropological Institute and Museum (Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057
Zurich, Switzerland). Christopher Boehm is Professor of Biological
Sciences and Anthropology at the University of Southern California
and Director of the Goodall Research Center (Los Angeles, California 90089, U.S.A.). This paper was submitted 15 VII 13, accepted
19 IX 14, and electronically published 10 IV 15.

of multimale/multifemale primate groups. The successful political structure that ultimately replaced the ancestral social
dominance hierarchy was an egalitarian political system in
which the group controlled its leaders. Group success depended on the ability of leaders to persuade and motivate and
of followers to submit to a consensual decision process. The
heightened social value of nonauthoritarian leadership entailed enhanced biological ﬁtness for such traits as linguistic
facility, political ability, and, indeed, human hypercognition
itself. This egalitarian political system persisted until cultural
changes in the Holocene fostered the accumulation of material wealth, through which it became possible again to sustain a social dominance hierarchy with strong authoritarian
leaders.

Self-Interest and Cultural Hegemony Models
of Political Power
The behavioral sciences during the second half of the twentieth century were dominated by two highly contrasting models of human political behavior. In biology, political science,
and economics, a Homo economicus self-interest model held
sway (Alexander 1987; Downs 1957; Mas-Colell et al. 1995).
In this model, individuals are rational self-regarding maximizers. In sociology, social psychology, and anthropology, by
contrast, a cultural hegemony model was generally accepted.
In this model, individuals are the passive internalizers of the
culture in which they operate. A dominant culture supplies
the norms and values associated with role performance, and

q 2015 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2015/5603-0002$10.00. DOI:10.1086/681217

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

328

Current Anthropology

individual behavior meets the requirements of the various
roles individuals are called upon to play in daily life (Durkheim 1902; Mead 1963; Parsons 1967), of which political participation is an important facet. Contemporary research has
been kind to neither model.
Gene-Culture Coevolution: An Alternative
to Cultural Hegemony
Contra cultural hegemony theory, daily life provides countless examples of the fragility of dominant cultures. AfricanAmericans in the era of the civil rights movement, for instance, rejected a powerful ideology justifying segregation;
American women in the 1960s rejected a deep-rooted patriarchal culture; and gay Americans rejected traditional JudeoChristian treatments of homosexuality. In succeeding years,
each of these minority countercultures was adopted by the
American public at large. In the Soviet Union, communist
leaders attempted to forge a dominant culture of socialist
morality by subjecting two generations of citizens to intensive indoctrination. This effort was unsuccessful and was rejected whole cloth immediately following the fall of the Soviet
regime. Similar examples can be given from political experience in many other societies.
There has always been an undercurrent of objection to the
cultural hegemony model, which Dennis Wrong (1961) aptly
called the “oversocialized conception of man.” Konrad Lorenz
(1963), Robert Ardrey (1997 [1966]), and Desmond Morris
(1999 [1967]) offered behavioral ecology alternatives, a line
of thought culminating in Edward O. Wilson’s Sociobiology:
The New Synthesis (1975), the resurrection of human nature by Donald Brown (1991), and Leda Cosmides and John
Tooby’s withering attack in The Adapted Mind on the socalled standard social science model of cultural hegemony
(Barkow et al. 1992). Meanwhile, the analytical foundations
of an alternative model, that of gene-culture coevolution (see
below), were laid by Geertz (1962), Dobzhansky (1963), Wallace (1970), Lumsden and Wilson (1981), Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1973, 1981), and Boyd and Richerson (1985). This
gene-culture coevolution model informs our analysis of the
evolution of human sociopolitical systems.
Homo Moralis
Undermining the self-interest model began in economics with
the ultimatum game experiments of Güth et al. (1982) and
Roth et al. (1991). In the ultimatum game, one subject, called
the proposer, is presented with a sum of money, say $10, and
is instructed to offer any portion of this—from nothing to
the full $10—to a second subject, called the responder. The
two subjects never learn each other’s identity, and the game
is played only once. The responder, who knows that the total
amount to be shared is $10, can either accept the offer or reject it. If the responder accepts the offer, the money is shared
accordingly. If the responder rejects the offer, both players

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

receive nothing. If the players care only about their own
payoffs and have no concern for fairness (i.e., they are selfinterested), a rational responder will always accept any positive amount of money. Knowing this, a rational proposer will
offer $1, and this will be accepted.
When the ultimatum game is actually played, however, this
self-interested outcome is almost never observed and rarely
even approximated. In many replications of this experiment
in more than 30 countries, under varying conditions and in
some cases with substantial amounts of money at stake, proposers routinely offer responders very generous shares, 50%
of the total generally being the modal offer. Responders frequently reject offers below 25% (Camerer 2003; Camerer and
Thaler 1995; Oosterbeek et al. 2004; Roth et al. 1991).
In postgame debrieﬁngs, responders who have rejected
low offers often express anger at the proposer’s greed and a
desire to penalize unfair behavior. The fact that positive offers are commonly rejected shows that responders have fairness concerns, and the fact that most proposers offer between 40% and 50% of the pie shows that proposers too have
fairness concerns themselves or at least understand that responders’ fairness concerns would motivate them to reject
low offers. Of special interest are those who reject positive offers. The explanation most consistent with the data is that
they are motivated by a desire to punish the proposer for
being unfair, even though it means giving up some money to
do so. While initially considered odd, these and other experimental results violating the self-interest axiom are now
commonplace.
These and related ﬁndings have led in recent years to a
revision of the received wisdom in biology and economics
toward the appreciation of the central importance of otherregarding preferences and character virtues in biological and
economic theory (Gintis et al. 2005; Henrich et al. 2005; Okasha and Binmore 2012). It might reasonably be thought, however, that these behaviors are the product of the culture of
advanced complex societies. To assess this possibility, a team
of anthropologists ran ultimatum game experiments in which
the subject pool consisted of members of 15 small-scale societies with little contact with markets, governments, or modern institutions (Henrich et al. 2004). The 15 societies included
hunter-gatherers, herders, and low-technology farmers.
This study found that many small-scale societies mirror the
results of the advanced economies, but others did not. Among
the Au and Gnau people in Papua New Guinea, ultimatum
game offers of more than half the pie were common. Moreover, while even splits were commonly accepted, both higher
and lower offers were rejected with about equal frequency.
This behavior is not surprising in light of the widespread practice of competitive gift giving as a means of establishing status
and subordinancy in these and many other New Guinea societies. By contrast, among the Machiguenga in Amazonian
Peru, almost three-quarters of the offers were a quarter of
the pie or less, and yet of 70 offers, there was just a single rejection, a pattern strikingly different from the standard ex-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

periments in advanced economies. However, even among the
Machiguenga, the mean offer was 27.5%, far more than would
have maximized the proposer’s payoffs, given the scant likelihood of a rejection.
Analysis of the experiments led to the following conclusions: (1) behaviors are highly variable across groups; (2) not a
single group conformed to or even approximated the model
of self-interested agents; and (3) despite the anonymous and
asocial setting of the experiments, between-group differences
in behavior reﬂected differences in the kinds of social interaction experienced in everyday life; that is, people generally
conform to cultural rules of their societies, even when there is
no chance a deviation will be punished.
The evidence for this latter conclusion is compelling. For
example, the Aché in Paraguay share equally among all group
members some kinds of food (meat and honey) acquired
through hunting and gathering. In our experiment, most
Aché proposers contributed half the pie or more. Similarly,
among the Lamalera whale hunters of Indonesia, who hunt
in large crews and divide their catch according to strict sharing rules, the proposer’s average allocation to the responder
was 58% of the pie. Moreover, the Indonesian whale hunters
played the game very differently from the Indonesian university students who were the subjects in another set of experiments (Cameron 1999). Indeed, where voluntary public
goods provision was customary in real life (e.g., the Harambee
system among the Orma herders in Kenya, whereby individuals contribute resources to build a school or repair a road),
contributions in the experimental public goods game were patterned after actual contributions in the actual Harambee system. Those with more cattle contributed more. By contrast,
in the ultimatum game, for which there apparently was no
everyday life analog, the wealthy and nonwealthy Orma behaved similarly.

The Moral Underpinnings of Modern
Political Systems
The untenability of the self-interest model of human action
is also clear from everyday experience. Political activity in
modern democratic societies provides unambiguous evidence.
In large elections, the rational self-regarding agent will not
vote because the costs of voting are positive and signiﬁcant,
but the probability that one vote will alter the outcome of the
election is vanishingly small, and adding a single vote to the
total of a winning candidate enhances the winner’s political
efﬁcacy at best an inﬁnitesimal amount (Riker and Ordeshook
1968). Thus, the personal gain from voting is too small to motivate behavior. For similar reasons, if one chooses to vote,
there is no plausible reason to vote on the basis of the impact
of the outcome of the election on one’s personal material
gains. It follows also that the voter—if rational, self-regarding,
and incapable of personally inﬂuencing the opinions of more
than a few others—will not bother to form opinions on political issues, because these opinions cannot affect the out-

329

come of elections. Yet people do vote, and many do expend
time and energy in forming political opinions. Although voters do appear to behave strategically (Fedderson and Sandroni
2006), their behavior does not conform to the self-interest
model (Edlin et al. 2007).
It also follows from the logic of self-regarding political behavior that rational self-regarding individuals will not participate in the sort of collective actions that are responsible
for the growth in the world of representative and democratic
governance, the respect for civil liberties, the rights of minorities and gender equality in public life, and the like. In the
self-interest model, only small groups aspiring for social dominance will act politically. Yet modern egalitarian political
institutions are the result of such collective actions (Bowles
and Gintis 1986; Giugni et al. 1998). This behavior cannot be
explained by the self-interest model.
Except for professional politicians and socially inﬂuential
individuals, electoral politics is a vast morality play to which
models of the rational self-regarding actor are not only a
poor ﬁt but also conceptually bizarre. It took Mancur Olson’s The Logic of Collective Action (1965) to make this clear
to many behavioral scientists, because virtually all students
of social life had assumed without reﬂection the faulty logic
that rational self-regarding individuals will vote and will “vote
their interests” (Downs 1957).
Defenders of the Homo economicus model may respond
that voters believe their votes make a difference, however untenable this belief might be under logical scrutiny. Indeed,
when asked why they vote, voters’ common response is that
they are trying to help get one or another party elected to
ofﬁce. When apprised of the illogical character of that response, the common reply is that there are in fact close elections, where the balance is tipped in one direction or another
by only a few hundred votes. When confronted with the fact
that one vote will not affect even such close elections, the
common repost is, “Well, if everyone thought like that, we
couldn’t run a democracy.”
Politically active and informed citizens appear to operate
on the principle that voting is both a duty and prerogative of
citizenship, an altruistic act that is justiﬁed by the categorical
imperative: act in conformance with the morally correct behavior for individuals in one’s position, without regard to
personal costs and beneﬁts. Such mental reasoning, which is
built on our urge to conform and our shared intentionality,
is implicated in many uniquely human cognitive characteristics, including cumulative culture and language (Bacharach
2006; Sugden 2003). Shared intentionality rests on a fundamentally prosocial disposition (Bratman 1993; Gilbert 1987;
Hrdy 2009; Tomasello and Carpenter 2007).

The Political and Economic Structure
of Primate Societies
Humans are one of more than 200 extant species belonging
to the Primate order. All primates have sociopolitical systems

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

330

Current Anthropology

for regulating social life within their communities. Understanding human sociopolitical organization involves specifying how and why humans are similar to and differ from
other social species in general and other primate species in
particular. Concerning the latter, there are two major sources
of information. First, some traits are distributed widely and
linked to other well-known traits and thus were almost certainly already present before humans evolved. For instance,
many primate species, including humans and our closest living relatives, seek to dominate others and are adept at forming coalitions. It is thus likely that their most recent common
ancestor also possessed these traits. Dominance seeking and
coalition formation in humans, then, are not purely cultural.
Rather, humans are endowed with the genetic prerequisites for
this behavior, as are numerous other primate species (Wrangham and Peterson 1996).
A second source is similarity with our close relatives, the
great apes and especially the genus Pan (chimpanzees and
bonobos). Most nonhuman primate species have great trouble in acting collectively in conﬂict with neighboring groups
(Willems et al. 2013). Chimpanzees are a major exception:
they engage in war-like raids where larger parties cooperate
closely to target and destroy much smaller ones (Goodall
1986; Wilson 2012). War among human hunter-gatherers
likewise largely consists of such a raiding strategy (Keeley
1996), suggesting a shared predisposition to engage in this
type of warfare (Wrangham and Glowacki 2012). Obviously,
the dramatic changes in human social organization accompanying the origin of defensible wealth (discussed below)
produced major changes in the nature of warfare, linked to
additional genetic predispositions, such as insider favoritism
(Bowles 2006, 2007, 2009; Bowles and Gintis 2011; LeVine
and Campbell 1972; Otterbein 2004). Using this logic, we can
examine the social structure of multimale/multifemale primate societies (de Waal 1997; Maestripieri 2007) to identify
the elements of human sociopolitical organization that were
already likely present among the ﬁrst hominins.
Primates live in groups to reduce the risk of predation
(Alexander 1974; van Schaik 1983), exchange information
about food location (Clutton-Brock 1974; Eisenberg et al.
1972), and defend food sources and mates against competing
groups (Wrangham 1980). These groups, however, rarely engage in organized collective action. As a result, the primate
form of group living has only limited need for leaders, that
is, individuals instrumental in initiating and coordinating
group-level action with the approval and support of other
group members. Instead, individuals vary in dominance based
on motivation and pure physical prowess, and dominant
males gain ﬁtness at the expense of subordinate members of
the group. This is especially true for our closest relatives, the
genus Pan. As King et al. (2009) stress, other species do often
have foraging leaders, but their power is based on hierarchical dominance rather than consensus. Despite the fact that
such leaders of the hunt appropriate most of the spoils, fol-

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

lowers must stick with the group to avoid predation while
grabbing what little of the catch they can (King et al. 2008;
Krauss et al. 2009).
In most primate species, both sexes form dominance hierarchies, in which more dominant individuals gain privileged access to food and mates and, as a result, tend to have
higher ﬁtness (Maestripieri 2007; Majolo et al. 2012; Vigilant
et al. 2001). In many primate species, dominant females depend on alliances to maintain their position, whereas the same
is true for males in far fewer primate species (van Schaik 1996),
most notably chimpanzees. Thus, dominants rarely perform
any group-level beneﬁcial acts. One exception is male displays toward predators, a behavior seen in a variety of primate species and generally linked to the protection of likely
offspring. Another is triadic power interventions (e.g., Boehm
1994; de Waal 1996) that end conﬂicts in apes and certain
monkeys.
The Origins of Primate Sociopolitical Structure
Given the variety of contemporary primate sociopolitical
structures, what can we say about the social structure of the
most recent common ancestor of contemporary primates, the
species from which the hominin species leading ultimately
to Homo sapiens branched off ? Our answer is based on the
fact that traits shared by several closely related species were
very likely shared by their most recent common ancestor.
The challenge is that primates exhibit a wide variety of sociopolitical structures. However, if we limit our sample to species living in woodlands and open savannah that engage in
collective defense and confrontational scavenging from large
carnivores, which was the probable condition faced by the primates’ most recent common ancestor, all extant species live
in large, multimale/multifemale groups.1 Thus, at least from
Homo habilis on, hominins likely lived in large multimale/
multifemale groups (Dunbar 2005; Foley 1996).
Recently, sophisticated phylogenetic approaches have
added precision to these inferences by reconstructing the origin of various kinds of social organization in deep time (Silk
2011). Shultz et al. (2011) completed a study based on the genetic distances and phenotypic social-structural similarities
of 217 extant primate species, the most recent common ancestor of which is far more ancient than the ancestral Pan.
Shultz et al. (2011) show that social organization tends to be
similar among closely related species, which implies that social
structure is determined largely by genes rather than environment in nonhuman primates. This ﬁnding runs counter to the
alternative assumption that primate social structure is a re1. The grass and savannah-living Patas monkey (Hall 1965) is the
single exception to the rule that savannah-living primates exhibit a
multimale/multifemale social structure. They avoid predators by staying
in trees as much as possible, cryptic behavior, wide group spread, and
rapid ﬂight.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

sponse to the distribution of food resources or risks and is not
affected by phylogenetic afﬁliation.
Shultz et al. (2011) conclude that the earliest primates
lived some 72 Mya as solitary foraging individuals who came
together only for mating. Multimale/multifemale aggregations
appeared some 52 Mya. We can infer from the social structure of contemporary nonhuman primate species living in
multimale/multifemale groups that mating was promiscuous
and males formed a hierarchical power structure with a single alpha male at the apex. Indeed, most nonhuman primates
that live in multimale groups today exhibit this living pattern
(Chapais 2008). While this social structure is highly stable and
has persisted into the present, when suitably stressed it broke
down into two social forms in which a social group included
only one male. The ﬁrst, which may have appeared about 16
Mya, was the single-male harem, while the second, appearing
about the same time, was single pair-living.
The implication is that the earliest hominids lived in multimale/multifemale promiscuous social bands, so Pan are archetypical species when it comes to reconstructing the origins
of the human political system. Dominant male chimpanzees
provide little leadership, and they provide virtually no parenting. In many primate species, dominant males have sufﬁciently high paternity certainty to induce them to provide
protection to infants (Paul et al. 2000), but in chimpanzees,
paternity is much less concentrated in top-ranked males (Vigilant et al. 2001; Boesch et al. 2006), most likely because chimpanzee females prefer multiple matings and cannot be controlled by dominant males. Thus, males tend to ignore rearing
the young. The only clear service dominant males provide
to the group is keeping the peace by intervening in disputes
and leading predator mobbing (de Waal 1997; Rudolf von
Rohr et al. 2012). In short, the political structure of chimpanzee society, like that of primates generally, is largely a system for funneling ﬁtness-enhancing resources to the apex of
a social dominance hierarchy based on physical prowess and
coalition-building talent. This holds basically for the bonobo
as well, where monopolization of matings by particular males
is even lower.
Primate Coalitional Politics
Chimpanzee males rely signiﬁcantly on coalitions and alliances. There are two major types of coalition: rank changing
and leveling (Pandit and van Schaik 2003; van Schaik et al.
2006). Rank changing occurs when a male relies on supporters to acquire and maintain hegemony (de Waal 1998;
Goodall 1964; Nishida and Hosaka 1996) and hence may
not have the highest individual ﬁghting ability (Boesch et al.
1998; de Waal 1998). Leveling occurs when multiple lowerranking males form coalitions to prevent the top male or
males from appropriating too large a share of the resources.
These coalitions do not change the dominance ranks of the
participants. Females similarly form such leveling coalitions

331

to counter the arbitrary power of dominant males, especially
in captivity (Goodall 1986). This pattern of political power
based on the hierarchical dominance of the physically powerful along with a system of sophisticated political alliances to
preserve or to limit the power of the alpha male (Boehm and
Flack 2010) is carried over, yet fundamentally transformed,
in human society (Boehm 2000; Knauft 1991).
The best predictor for male-male coalitions among primates is simply the fact that multiple males ﬁnd themselves
together and no single male can fully monopolize all matings
(Bissonnette et al. 2014). Thus, there are broad similarities in
social dominance and coalition formation across all multimale/multifemale primate species. This fact runs counter to
traditional political theory. Aristotle’s zoon politicon notwithstanding, political theorists have widely assumed that political
structure involves purely cultural evolution, whereas the primate data show roots to political behavior going back millions of years. The primate evidence is important because it
lays the basis for an evolutionary analysis of human political systems (de Waal 1998). Such an analysis may elucidate
the role of basic human political predispositions in reinforcing and undermining distinct sorts of human sociopolitical
structures.

The Evolutionary History of Primate Societies
It would be useful to be able to read past social structure from
the historical record. But we cannot. The fossil record provides the most concrete answers to our evolutionary history
but is highly incomplete. There are, for instance, skeletal records of only about 500 individuals from our hominin past.
Moreover, behavior does not fossilize, and social structure
leaves no direct marks in the earth. This is why we must resort
to the relationship between phylogenetic proximity and social organization in living primate species (Shultz et al. 2011).
The hominin lineage branched off from the primate mainstream some 6.5 million years ago or earlier (Langergraber
2012; Wood 2010). The watershed event in the hominin line
was the emergence of bipedalism. Bipedalism is well developed in Australopithecus afarensis, which appeared 3 million
years after the origin of the hominin lineage. Homo ergaster
(2.0–1.3 Mya) or Homo erectus (1.9–0.143 Mya) was the ﬁrst
currently documented specialized biped, having a relatively
short arm/leg ratio that rendered brachiation infeasible.
Bipedalism in hominins was critically dependent on the
prior adaptation of the primate upper torso to life in the
trees. The Miocene hominoid apes were not true quadrupeds
but rather had specialized shoulder and arm muscles for
swinging and climbing, as well as a specialized hand structure
for grasping branches and manipulating leaves, insects, and
fruit. When the hominin line was freed from the exigencies of
arborial life, the locomotory function of the upper limbs was
reduced, so they could be reorganized for manipulative and
projectile control purposes. Both a more efﬁcient form of bi-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

332

Current Anthropology

pedalism and the further transformation of the arm, hand,
and upper torso became possible.
Nonhominin primate species are capable of walking on
hind legs but only with difﬁculty and for short periods of
time. Chimpanzees, for instance, cannot straighten their legs
and require constant muscular exertion to support the body.
Moreover, the center of gravity of the chimpanzee body must
shift with each step, leading to a pronounced lumbering motion with signiﬁcant side-to-side momentum shifts (O’Neil
2012). The hominin pelvis was shortened from top to bottom and, by the time H. ergaster emerged, had been rendered
bowl shaped to facilitate terrestrial locomotion without sideward movement, the hominin leg bones became sturdy, the
leg muscles were strengthened to permit running, and the
development of arches in the feet facilitated a low-impact
transfer of weight from leg to leg (Bramble and Lieberman
2004). The specialized form of bipedality that arose around
2 Mya thus facilitates running efﬁciently for great distances,
although not approaching the speed of many large four-footed
mammals.
Today we celebrate specialized bipedality as the basis for
human upper-body physical and psychomotor capacities for
crafting tools and handicrafts. But another major contribution of these capacities, as we explain below, was for fashioning and using lethal weapons.

The Control of Fire Fosters
Social Sharing Norms
The hominin control of ﬁre cannot be accurately dated. We
have ﬁrm evidence from about 400,000 years ago in Europe
(Roebroeks and Villa 2011) and about 800,000 years ago in
Israel (Alperson-Aﬁl 2008), but it is likely that this key event
had originated in Africa much earlier (Gowlett and Wrangham 2013). The control of ﬁre had strong effects on hominin cultural and phylogenetic evolution. First, the transition
to specialized bipedality is much easier to understand if the
hominins that experienced this transition had control of ﬁre
(Wrangham and Carmody 2010). Before the control of ﬁre,
humans almost certainly took to the trees at night, like most
other primates, as a defense against predators. Because predators have an instinctive fear of ﬁre, the control of ﬁre permitted hominins, who were already bipedal, to abandon climbing almost completely.
Second, the practice of cooking food was a related cultural
innovation with broad gene-culture coevolutionary implications. Cooking favors a central location to which the catch is
transported and hence requires abandoning the competitive,
socially uncoordinated “tolerated theft” distribution of calories typical of food sharing in nonhuman primate species in
favor of a distribution based on widely agreed-upon fairness
norms (Blurton-Jones 1987; Isaac 1977). This major sociopsychological transition was probably made possible by the
adoption of some form of cooperative breeding and hunting
among hominins that had begun by the time Homo erectus

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

emerged (Burkart and van Schaik 2010). In sum, while the
early advent of cooking is not yet ﬁrmly established, it is
likely that the control of ﬁre and the practice of cooking were
an important precondition of the emergence of a human moral order.
Hominins with access to cooked food did not require the
large colon characteristic of other primates, which allowed
them to reduce the amount of time spent chewing food from
the 4–7 hours a day characteristic of the great apes to about
1 hour per day. With a smaller gut, less need for chewing,
and more rapid digestion, hominins were liberated to develop their aerobic capacity and perfect their running ability
(Wrangham and Carmody 2010).
From Gatherer to Scavenger
Beginning around 2.5 million years ago, there was a major
forking in the evolutionary path of our possible ancestors.
The Australopithecines branched in at least two—perhaps
more, but the fossil record in this area is quite incomplete—
very different evolutionary directions. One led to the robust
Australopithecines and a genetic dead end by about 1.4 million years ago, and the other very likely led to the ﬁrst humans.
These diverging evolutionary paths appear to have been
the response to novel environmental challenges. Coinciding
with this hominin divergence was a shift in the global climate to frequently ﬂuctuating conditions. Early hominins
succeeded by learning to exploit the increased climatic instability (O’Connell et al. 2002; Potts 1996, 1998; Richerson
et al. 2001).2 The resulting adaptations enhanced hominin
cognitive and sociostructural versatility. “Early bipedality,
stone transport, . . . encephalization, and enhanced cognitive
and social functioning,” Potts (1998:93) argues, “all may
reﬂect adaptations to environmental novelty and highly
varying selective contexts.”
A diet based signiﬁcantly on the ﬂesh and bone marrow of
large animals provided a niche for emerging hominins quite
distinct from that of other primates and thus selected for the
traits that most distinguish humans from apes. This much
was clear to Darwin in The Descent of Man (1871). However,
until recently, most paleoanthropologists assumed that prey
was acquired through hunting from the australopithicine
outset (Dart 1925; Lee and DeVore 1968; but see Binford
1985). In fact, it now appears that early hominins, in the

2. DeMenocal (2011) notes that Darwin (1859) long ago speculated
on the role of climate change in human evolution, as did Dart (1925),
and that modern ﬁndings support the importance of climate-based
selection pressures (Potts 1998; Vrba 1995) and, speciﬁcally, climate variability. Potts (1998) examined the environmental records of several hominin localities, ﬁnding that habitat-speciﬁc hypotheses are disconﬁrmed
by the evidence. By contrast, the variability selection hypothesis, which
states that large disparities in environmental conditions were responsible
for important episodes of adaptive evolution, was widely supported.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

transition from the Pliocene to the Pleistocene, were more
likely scavenger-gatherers than hunter-gatherers, of which
there is ﬁrm evidence dating from 3.4 Mya (McPherron et al.
2010).
The ﬁrst proponents of early hominins as scavengers believed that the scavenging was passive, in that small groups
of hominins took possession of carcasses only after other
predators, upon being sated, abandoned their prey (Binford
1985; Blumenschine et al. 1994), but more recent evidence
suggests the prevalence of competitive or power scavenging,
in which organized groups of humans sporting primitive
weapons chased the killers and appropriated carcasses in relatively intact shape (Dominguez-Rodrigoa and Barba 2006).
The implicit argument is that the combination of coordinated
collective action and the lethal weapons of the period were
sufﬁcient to drive off other predators and hence presumably
to kill certain live prey as well. While a large prey can be driven
off a cliff or trapped in a box canyon, it requires powerful
weapons to cripple or kill a large predator. Before the advent
of poisoned stone-tipped spears and arrows, the active pursuit of large prey was likely impossible (Sahle et al. 2013).
The earliest known use of wooden javelins (Keeley and Toth
1981; Thieme 1997) suggests medium-sized prey.
Flaked stone tool making, butchering large animals, and
expanded cranial capacity all appear around 3.4 Mya (McPherron et al. 2010), but there is no evidence that Australopithecenes hunted large game. Australopithecus and Homo
habilis were in fact quite small, with adult males weighing
less than 100 pounds and females about 75 pounds. Their
tools were primitive, consisting of stone scrapers and rough
hammerstones. They therefore lacked the sophisticated weapons for hunting large and swift-moving prey and hence are
unlikely to have hunted effectively, but they could well have
scavenged. Modern chimpanzees and baboons are known to
scavenge the kills of cheetahs and leopards (Medina 2007), so
this behavior was likely in the repertoire of the earliest hominins. With highly cooperative and carefully coordinated maneuvers by use of weapons, they could have chased away even
the most ferocious predators.
Hunting and scavenging small animals is not cost effective
for large nonhuman primates, while scavenging large animals requires group participation and efﬁciently coordinated
cooperation in both organizing an attack on predators feeding on a large prey and protecting against predators while
processing and consuming the carcass (Isaac 1978). Moreover, use of stones as weapons that might be used to scare off
other predators and scavengers (Isaac 1987) has been questioned (Whittaker and McCall 2001), but most likely there
was an array of tools made of softer materials—very probably including wooden spears—suitable for making blufﬁng
attacks.
Unlike wooden weapons, stones could have been carefully
amassed at strategic sites within a large scavenging area, so
that when a scouting party located an appropriate food object to scavenge, it could call others to haul the stones to the

333

site of the carcass, as a strategic operation preceding its appropriation (Isaac 1977). These could have been the ﬁrst lethal weapons, but carrying wooden spears or clubs would
have served equally well to intimidate competing predators
and also would have been useful in killing small game.

Stones as Lethal Weapons
Stones are used today in certain contexts by hunter-gatherers
as found objects and possibly as fashioned projectiles. Barbara Isaac (1987) studied stones used by recent foragers, also
found in concentrations at Olduvai sites by Mary Leakey
(1971), some of which were carefully ﬁnished spheroids.
She observes that the size and shapes of the Olduvai stones
render them appropriate for throwing. Recent foragers do
use found object stones quite effectively as ﬁghting weapons.
Isaac (1987) has documented devastating attacks by huntergatherers against early encroaching Europeans, when intensive stoning actually proved more effective than musketry in
rapidly inﬂicting serious casualties. This took place at contact in various parts of the world, so the traditions were
likely preexisting.
In Africa, behaviorally modern humans could have used
long-range projectile weaponry (atlatl darts and arrows) in
conﬂict for at least 50,000 years (Ambrose 2008; Roach et al.
2013; Shea 2006; Wadley et al. 2009; Wilkins et al. 2012;
Wynn 2009). The recent hunting evidence includes a Levalloisian spear point embedded in a prey skeleton (Boëda
et al. 1999). Group conﬂict likely accounts for the limited
sampling we do have for humans of Pleistocene death-byprojectiles (Keeley 1996; Thorpe 2003), which includes at
Grimaldi a child with a point embedded in its spine (27,000–
36,000 BP), in the former Czechoslovakia weapons traumas
and cranial fractures on adult males (24,000–35,000 BP), in
Egypt an adult male with a point embedded in his arm (20,000
BP), and a Nubian cemetery where 40% of the interred exhibited weapon traumas (12,000–14,000 BP). Tacon and Chippendale (1994) have documented Australian rock art dating
back to 10,000 BP that depicts armed combat, with increasing
numbers of combatants by 4000 BP. In the Holocene, armed
combat is well documented and widespread, as in the work of
Lambert (1997) on the remains of California Indians, which
exhibit plentiful head injuries and parrying fractures.
If behaviorally modern human beings have used longrange projectile weapons against prey for at least 50,000
years, doubtless they sometimes turned such weapons against
other humans over the same period. A special instance of
weapon use is documented in art from Spain’s Remigia cave.
Human stick ﬁgures are shown standing with bows held
about their heads while a male lies on the ground with the
same number of arrows pincushioning him. There are 10 men
in the largest of the groups. This may express a group execution theme or possibly a raid carrying out an act of revenge
(see Otterbein 2004). This art appears to date to the early
Neolithic.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

334

Current Anthropology

Technological developments such as atlatls, bows and arrows, shields, and body armor are all relatively recent. It has
been widely suggested that the advent of the spear-thrower
(atlatl) arrived rather late, about 30,000 BP, and the bow and
arrow later still (e.g. Klein 1999). But there are recent reports
(Lombard and Phillipson 2010) suggesting that bows and
arrows may have been in use as early as about 60,000 BP.
Some contemporary groups use poisoned projectiles, and
their use in prehistory is now susceptible to study (d’Errico
et al. 2012), but further research is needed.
This picture of Pleistocene weapon use is supported by
that fact that the fossils of large animals that have markings
on bones indicating hominin ﬂaying and scraping with
ﬂaked stone tools are often found with stones that originated
several kilometers away. Contemporary chimpanzees carry
stones to nut-bearing trees that they use to crack the nuts
(Boesch and Boesch-Achermann 2000), so this behavior was
likely available to Australopithecines. Chimpanzees, however,
carry stones only several hundred meters at most, whereas
Homo habilis scavengers carried stones as far as 10 km, probably because they had invented portable containers (McGrew
1992).
Neither the Oldowan tools of the early period nor the later
and more sophisticated Acheulean tools—which are found
from the early Pleistocene up to about 200,000 years ago—
show any sign of being useful as hunting weapons. However,
besides stones, human power scavengers of 500,000 years ago
probably had sharpened and ﬁre-hardened spears to ward off
competitive scavengers and threatening predators, at least
after the domestication of ﬁre (Thieme 1997). These weapons could also have been used against conspeciﬁcs. By contrast, nonhuman primates use tools, but they do not use weapons in conﬂictual encounters (Huffman and Kalunde 1993;
McGrew 2004). In these species, there is simply no record of
a fashioned or found object weapon being used to injure or
kill a conspeciﬁc.
The cognitive potential to invent and use lethal weapons is
likely present in the two Pan species. However, in nature, bonobos and chimpanzees fashion tools for extraction of insect
or plant foods, while in both species, intimidation displays
merely involve found objects being brandished or dragged.
Chimpanzees use sticks fashioned from tree branches to ferret bushbabies from their tree hollow hiding places (Gibbons
2007; Pruetz and Bertolani 2007), so the use of sharpened
sticks was thus likely within the cognitive capacity of H. habilis. However, there is a considerable distance between using
sharp sticks as impaling devices and as well-aimed projectiles
(Nishida 1973).
The ﬁrst dedicated and unambiguously lethal weapons to
appear with excellent preservation in the archeological record
are the multiple all-wooden spears documented by Thieme
(1997) at Schöningen, with more than a dozen butchered
wild horses and some bison located nearby. These javelins
are both streamlined aerodynamically and well balanced for
effective throwing, so they were projectile weapons capable

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

of bringing down medium-sized game at a distance. They
also provide a defense against dangerous prey, and they offer
hunters a means of threatening other predators away from
their kills. These considerations suggest that a paleorecord of
lithic weaponry alone is seriously incomplete. What the lithic
record does suggest, in its Acheulian continuity, is that this
tradition of making wooden spears might also have had great
longevity (see Kelly 2005). The emergence of lethal weapons
was likely important in the evolution of hominin social organization (Roach et al. 2013). In hunter-gatherer conﬂicts,
hunting weapons quickly become lethal, and even an outnumbered victim can inﬂict casualties (Lee 1979; see also
Churchill and Rhodes 2009). Bingham (1999), Gintis (2000),
Bingham and Souza (2009), and Boyd et al. (2010) stress the
importance of the superior physical and psychomotor capacities of humans in clubbing and throwing projectiles as
compared with other primates, citing Goodall (1964) and
Plooij (1978) on the relative advantage of humans. Darlington (1975), Fifer (1987), and Isaac (1987) document the importance of these traits in human evolution. Boehm (1997),
Bingham (1999), and Okada and Bingham (2008) document
that humans have developed the ability to carry out collective
punishment against norm violators, thus radically lowering
the cost of punishing transgressors. Calvin (1983) argues that
humans are unique in possessing the neural machinery for
rapid manual-brachial movements that both allows for precision stone-throwing and lays the basis for the development
of language, which—like accurate throwing—depends on the
brain’s capacity to orchestrate a series of rapidly changing
muscle movements. Indeed, Roach et al. (2013) showed that
Homo erectus had evolved this capacity for accurate overhead throwing, and recent work suggests that the origins of
human language are also much older than commonly assumed (Dediu and Levinson 2013), originating in all likelihood more than 700,000 years ago.3

Lethal Combat Between Groups
Fighting between groups ranges from single revenge killings
to careful raids in which safety of the raiders is as important
as inﬂicting damage on the enemy, to intensive warfare with
genocidal attacks and face-to-face large-scale battle (Keeley
1996; Kelly 2000; Otterbein 2004). Such ﬁghting involves
assessments of the relative ﬁghting power of adversaries and
of risk (Wrangham and Glowacki 2012), and the array of
weapons available to each side obviously enters into these
3. The fossil evidence indicates that hominins developed speech on
the order of 1 Mya. The hyoid bone is a key element of speech production in humans. Martinez et al. (2008) show that hominin hyoid
bones from 540,000 years ago are similar and hence were inherited from
their last common ancestor, Homo rhodesiensis, which was from 700,000
to 1,000,000 years ago. Martinez et al. (2004) use evidence from the
acoustical properties of Middle Pleistocene fossil remains of the hominin
inner ear to argue that hominins of this period had auditory capacities
similar to those of living humans.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

assessments. The result is an ethnocentric species (LeVine
and Campbell 1972) whose members are predisposed to assume the risks associated with aggression, especially against
outsiders, but also strive to minimize those risks.
All contemporary foragers arm themselves with lethal
hunting weapons, and at times these weapons are deployed
by individuals against within-group adversaries and by the
group in executing serious deviants (Boehm 1997; Knauft
1991). Both types of homicide, while rare, are well documented, despite a universally strong ethos that strongly disapproves of killing a group member (Brown 1991). To keep
their systems of social cooperation viable, foragers strive to
peaceably adjudicate the conﬂicts in their midst (Boehm 2000).
These moral inhibitions are relaxed when ethnocentrism
comes into play. The use of weapons between groups can
entail massive casualties when desired cooperative relations
among groups fail and conﬂict gains the upper hand (Wiessner 1977). However, even given a pattern of recurrent ethnocentric ﬁghting between groups, hunter-gatherers may succeed in managing these conﬂicts (Boehm 2013). While the
active management of hostilities is universal within bands,
such between-group efforts remain both sporadic and unpredictable. Weapons can make forager bands very dangerous
to one another to the point of genocide, and some groups live
with such hostilities without trying to curtail them.

Social Hierarchy: Dominance
and Reverse Dominance
James Woodburn (1982) classiﬁed hunter-gatherer societies
into immediate-return and delayed-return systems. In the
former, group members obtain direct return from their labor
in hunting and gathering, with food lasting at most a few
days. The tools and weapons they use are highly portable. In
delayed-return foraging societies, individuals hold rights over
valuable assets, such as means of production (boats, nets, beehives, and the like) and processed and stored food and materials. These societies exhibit forms of social stratiﬁcation
akin to those in modern societies: social dominance hierarchies in the form of lineages and clans. However, the fossil
record suggests that delayed-return human society is a quite
recent innovation, appearing some 10,000 years ago, although
in ecologically suitable locations, it may have existed earlier
(most such locations are now below sea level). Homo sapiens
thus evolved predominantly in the context of immediatereturn systems.
The important factor in delayed return is not the cognitive capacity for delayed gratiﬁcation or long-range planning, which certainly existed in immediate-return societies,
but rather the availability of cumulable material wealth. Material wealth allows those who seek social dominance to control allies and resources and thereby thwart the capacity of
subordinates to disable and kill them. As long as the material
gains from a position of social dominance exceed the cost of
coalition building and paying guard labor, social dominance

335

of the sort common in other primate societies can be reestablished in human society. In fact, the appearance of farming and private property in land led to high levels of political
inequality in only a few societies, and states with a monopoly
in coercive power emerged only after a millennium of settled
agriculture. Nor were early farming societies more economically stratiﬁed than hunter-gatherer societies (Borgerhoff
Mulder et al. 2009). The accumulation of material wealth is
thus merely a precondition for the reestablishment of social
dominance hierarchies. To avoid confusion, we will call societies that lack forms of material wealth accumulation simple rather than immediate-return societies.
Simple societies, Woodburn (1982:434) suggests, are
“profoundly egalitarian . . . systematically eliminat[ing] distinctions . . . of wealth, of power and of status.” Fried (1967),
Service (1975), Knauft (1991), and others likewise comment
on the egalitarian character of simple hunter-gatherer societies. The simple versus delayed return dichotomy is
somewhat overdrawn, since there is in fact a continuous
range of variation between the two archetypes. Many Pleistocene humans used some storage, even if they were nomadic, and they remained strongly egalitarian. The majority
of the 58 Late Pleistocene appropriate foraging societies
coded by Boehm (2012; see discussion below), including the
!Kung considered by Knauft (1991), are of an intermediate
type. What factors are responsible for such unusual egalitarianism? Here, we will argue it is due to the combination of
interdependence and ability to punish transgressors.
Cut marks on bones suggest that a major investment in
large game hunting increased decisively only 250,000 years
ago (Stiner 2002), and delegating sharing to a single butcher
began 200,000 years ago (Stiner et al. 2009). In establishing
timing of this transition to heavy reliance on medium-sized
game in humans, Stiner (2002) uses multiple indices—including the age structure of prey and cut marks—to suggest
that at this time ungulate hunting became prominent in
human subsistence. However, cut marks on bones may not
be a reliable indicator of how meat is shared (Lupo and
O’Connell 2002). Indeed, if Wrangham and Carmody (2010)
are correct in dating the control of ﬁre by hominins and the
cooking of meat, the problem of the fair distribution of meat
among families—especially important in hard times when
only medium- and small-sized prey were available—may well
have been solved much earlier. This was likely an early source
of egalitarian sentiment that also provided the material substrate for the development of a social morality. Contemporary hunter-gatherer societies are often violent and competitive (Potts 1996), but they almost always distribute large
game peacefully, if sometimes contentiously, on the basis of a
commonly accepted set of fairness principles (Boehm 2004;
Kaplan and Hill 1985b; Kelly 1995).
The human ecological niche requires food sharing not
only daily but also on a longer-term basis because of the
occasional injuries or illnesses to which even the best hunter
or gatherer may be subjected (Hill et al. 2011; Sugiyama and

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

336

Current Anthropology

Chacon 2000). Thus, each individual forager, especially in
the immediate-return form of foraging, is utterly dependent
on the others in their camp, band, or even wider sharing
unit. This strong interdependence dampens the tendency
to free ride on others’ efforts and favors strong individual
tendencies toward egalitarianism as well as sophisticated fairness norms concerning the division of the spoils (Kaplan and
Hill 1985a; Whallon 1989).
Collective hunting in other species does not require a
fairness ethic because participants in the kill simply eat what
they can secure from the carcass and because dominants are
evolved to tolerate subordinates to a point that all the hunters
are adequately nourished. However, the practice of bringing
the kill to a central site for cooking, which became characteristic of hominin societies, is not compatible with uncoordinated sharing and eating. In the words of Winterhalder and
Smith,
Only with the evolution of reciprocity or exchange-based
food transfers did it become economical for individual hunters to target large game. The effective value of a large mammal to a lone forager . . . probably was not great enough to
justify the cost of attempting to pursue and capture it. . . .
However, once effective systems of reciprocity or exchange
augment the effective value of very large packages to the
hunter, such prey items would be more likely to enter the
optimal diet. (Winterhalder and Smith 1992:60)

Fire and cooking thus coevolved with the emergence of a
normative order and social organization based on ethical
behavior.
The second element is that egalitarianism is imposed by
the community, creating what Boehm (1999) calls a reverse
dominance hierarchy. Hunter-gatherers share with other primates the striving for hierarchical power, but among mobile
foragers, social dominance aspirations are successfully countered because individuals do not accept being controlled by
an alpha male and are extremely sensitive to attempts of
group members to accumulate power through coercion. When
an individual appears to be stepping out of line by threatening or killing group members, he will be warned and punished. If this behavior continues and ostracism does not
work, the group will delegate one member, usually a close
relative of the offender, to kill him. Boehm’s message in Hierarchy in the Forest (1999) is that “egalitarianism . . . involves
a very special type of hierarchy, a curious type that is based
on antihierarchical feelings.”
We can regard this phenomenon as an extension of the
leveling coalitions seen among primate males (Pandit and
van Schaik 2003). Female chimpanzees in captivity act collectively to neutralize alpha male bullies (de Waal 1996),
and wild chimpanzees form large coalitions to banish, badly
wound, or even kill high-ranking males. Bonobos in the wild
have been observed to behave similarly. By comparison with
humans, however, leveling coalitions among primates are
limited to the genus Pan and generally quite small.

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

Because of the extremely long period during which humans evolved without the capacity to accumulate wealth, we
have become constitutionally predisposed to exhibit these
antihierarchical feelings. Of course, in modern democratic
societies, there is still enough willingness to bend to authority in humans to ensure that return to a tyrannical social
dominance hierarchy remains a constant threat and often a
reality.
Capable leadership in the absence of a strong social dominance hierarchy in band-level societies is doubtless of critical importance to their success, and leaders are granted by
their superior position and with the support of their followers, with ﬁtness and material beneﬁts. Leadership, however,
is based not on physical prowess but rather on the capacity to
motivate, persuade, and help the band to reach a consensus.
This account of the growth of intelligence is an elaboration
upon the Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis (Byrne and
Whiten 1988; Humphrey 1976; Jolly 1972) that stresses the
effect of encephalization on enhancing the mean ﬁtness of
group members, not simply advancing the interests of the
leader.
Reverse dominance hierarchy is documented by Boehm,
who located 339 detailed ethnographic studies of huntergatherers, 150 of which are simple hunter-gatherer societies.
He coded 50 of these societies from around the world. He
calls these simple hunter-gather societies Late Pleistocene appropriate (LPA). Despite the fact that these societies have
faced highly variable ecological conditions, Boehm ﬁnds that
their social organization follows the pattern suggested by
Woodburn (1982) and elaborated by Boehm (1997). The LPAs
exhibit reverse dominance hierarchy and subscribe to a
common human social morality. This morality operates
through internalized norms, so that individuals act
prosocially because they value moral behavior for its own
sake and would feel socially uncomfortable behaving otherwise.4
How do we explain this unique pattern of sociopolitical
organization? Woodburn attributes this to humans’ access to
lethal weapons that neutralize a social dominance hierarchy
based on coercion. “Hunting weapons are lethal,” he writes,
“not just for game animals but also for people. Effective protection against ambush is impossible . . . with such lethal
weapons” (1982:436). Woodburn adds, “In normal circumstances the possession by all men, however physically weak,
cowardly, unskilled or socially inept, of the means to kill se-

4. The notions of norms and norm internalization (Durkheim 1902;
Parsons 1937) are common in the social sciences. According to the sociopsychological theory of norms, appropriate behavior in a social role is
given by a social norm that speciﬁes the duties, privileges, and expected
behavior associated with the role. Adequate performance in a social role
normally requires that the actor have a personal commitment to the role
that cannot be captured by the self-regarding public payoffs associated
with the role (Gintis 2003a; Gintis and Helbing, forthcoming).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

cretly anyone perceived as a threat to their own well-being . . .
acts directly as a powerful leveling mechanism. Inequalities
of wealth, power and prestige . . . can be dangerous for
holders where means of effective protection are lacking”
(1982:436).
Boehm (2012) argues that his LPAs inherited from our
ancient hunter-gatherer forbears the capacity to control free
riders through collective policing but using gossip and informal meetings as the method of collecting information
concerning the behavior of group members. Moreover, according to our best evidence, the hunter-gatherer societies
that deﬁned human existence until some 10,000 years ago
also were involved in widespread communal and cooperative
child rearing (Hrdy 1999, 2000, 2009) and hunting (Boehm
1999, 2012; Bowles and Gintis 2011; Boyd and Silk 2002),
thus tightening the bonds of sociality in the human group
and increasing the social costs of free-riding behavior.
Nonhuman primates never developed weapons capable of
deﬁnitively controlling a dominant male. Even when sound
asleep, a male chimpanzee reacts to being accosted by waking and engaging in a physical battle, basically unharmed by
surprise attack. In Demonic Males (1996), Wrangham and
Peterson recount several instances where even three or four
male chimpanzees viciously and relentlessly attack a male for
20 minutes without succeeding in killing him (but see Watts
et al. 2006). The limited effectiveness of chimpanzees in this
regard can mainly be ascribed to their inability to wield effectively potentially dangerous natural objects, for instance,
stones and rocks. A chimpanzee may throw a large rock as
part of a display, but only rarely will it achieve its target.
The human lifestyle, unlike that of chimpanzees, requires
many collective decisions, such as when and where to move
camp and which alliances to sustain or cut. This lifestyle thus
requires a complex sociopolitical decision-making structure
and a sophisticated normative order. Many researchers incorrectly equate dominance—as found among chimpanzees—
with leadership. In some species, such as gorillas, dominants
can indeed initiate or inﬂuence group movements, because
others rely on the dominant male as the main protector and
value his proximity. In most human foragers, there are no
such dominants.
Capable leadership in the absence of a social dominance
hierarchy in egalitarian human societies is of critical importance to their success. However, despite their exceptionally generous treatment of band members, human leaders are
granted by their superior position—and with the support of
their followers—with certain material beneﬁts and ﬁtness
(Price and Van Vugt 2014), such as multiple wives. Leadership, as we have seen, is based not on physical prowess and
coercion but rather on the capacity to motivate and persuade. Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1989) and Wiessner (2006), among
many others, have stressed the importance in hominin societies of leadership based on persuasion and coalition building. In discussing mobile foragers, Wiessner remarks, “Unlike
nonhuman primates, for whom hierarchy is primarily es-

337

tablished through physical dominance, humans achieve inequalities through such prosocial currencies as the ability
to mediate or organize defense, ritual, and exchange” (2009:
197–198). Interestingly, our closest living relative, the chimpanzee, shows a tendency in the same direction, which is unusual among primates: successful top-ranked males are good
social strategists (Goodall 1986; Nishida and Hosaka 1996).
It is important not to confuse reverse dominance hierarchy—which is based on a predisposition to reject being dominated—with a speciﬁc predisposition for egalitarian outcomes. Rather, persuasion and inﬂuence become a new basis
for social dominance (Clutton-Brock 2009), which tends to
be no less powerful for its subtlety. Wiessner observes that
successful small-scale societies “encourage the capable to
excel and achieve higher status on the condition that they
continue to provide beneﬁts to the group. In no egalitarian
institutions can the capable infringe on the autonomy of
others, appropriate their labor, or tell them what to do”
(2006:198).

Are There Egalitarian Nonhuman Primates?
If there were a multimale/multifemale primate society lacking a social dominance hierarchy and lacking lethal weapons
yet exhibiting reverse dominance hierarchy, the propositions
offered in this paper would be compromised. Does such a
society exist? Here, an important distinction can be drawn
between egalitarianism ﬂowing from weak social interaction
and a low level of social contestation, on the one hand, and
egalitarianism stemming from a high level of interdependence and some form of subordinate leverage over dominants (Sterck et al. 1997).
While there are clear behavioral patterns in nonhuman
primates that serve as the basis for human reverse dominance hierarchy, all multimale/multifemale nonhuman primate societies are in fact based on strongly expressed social
dominance hierarchies. There may be variation in the degree
to which female or male dominance relations are decided,
and thus their dominance hierarchies are more or less steep,
depending on the strength of contest competition for resources (Sterck et al. 1997). It is often argued that bonobos
(Pan paniscus) are more egalitarian than chimpanzees and
more like humans (de Waal 1997; Hare et al. 2007). However,
except for a female dominance hierarchy in feeding access
for infants, the pattern of dominance in bonobos strongly
resembles that of chimpanzees (Furuichi 1987, 1989, 1997),
although estimates of the steepness of dominance hierarchies
among males and females are not consistent across studies
(Jaeggi et al. 2010; Stevens et al. 2007).
Similarly, reports indicate rather thoroughgoing egalitarianism among woolly spider monkeys, or muriquis (Strier
1992), which also live in sizeable multimale/multifemale
groups, much like those of bonobos and chimpanzees. They
are highly promiscuous, and males strongly compete for
matings (Milton 1984; Strier 1987). In all the primate ex-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

338

Current Anthropology

amples of egalitarianism in sizeable groups, there is a clear
reduction in the intensity of male contest competition as a
result of female reproductive physiology that leads to unpredictable ovulation and thus low potential monopolization
of matings—and thus paternity concentration—by topranking males (van Schaik et al. 2004). Thus, these egalitarian
social relations are the result of scramble-like competition.
In none of these societies do we ﬁnd the interdependence
that we observe in human societies. The closest analog is the
societies of cooperative breeders, as in callitrichids, but these
are rarely multimale/multifemale. Among nonprimates, wild
dogs and wolves, which are both cooperative breeders and
hunters (Macdonald and Sillero-Zubiri 2004), came closest,
but even there we mostly—though not always—have a single
breeding pair rather than multiple cooperating pairs. We
conclude that on the basis of available evidence, there are no
multimale/multifemale egalitarian primate societies except for
Homo sapiens.

Phylogenetic and Cultural Implications
of Governance by Consent
We hypothesize that, following the development of lethal
weapons and the suppression of dominance hierarchies based
on physical prowess, successful hominin and human social
bands came to value individuals who could command prestige by virtue of their persuasive capacities. While it was by no
means necessary that this behavior emerge from the collapse
of a social dominance hierarchy based on force, it did in fact
emerge in the human line, and no other solution to the problem of leadership has been observed in the primate order.
The human egalitarian solution emerged in the context of
bands insisting that their leaders behave with modesty, generosity, and fairness (Boehm 1993). A sagacious and effective
leader will attempt to parley his important social position
into material and ﬁtness beneﬁts but not so much as to induce followers to replace him with a less demanding leader.
Persuasion was the name of the game, and excessive exercise
of power would reverse the leader’s fortunes. Persuasion depends on clear logic, analytical abilities, a high degree of social cognition (knowing how to form coalitions and motivate
others), and linguistic facility (Plourde 2010). Leaders with
these traits could be effective, but one intemperate move
could lead to a leader’s fall from power. Thus, in concert
with the evolution of an ever more complex feeding niche
(Kaplan et al. 2000), the social structure of hunter-gatherer
life, in typical gene-culture coevolutionary fashion, contributed to the progressive encephalization and the evolution
of the physical and mental prerequisites of effective linguistic and facial communication. In short, 2 million years of
evolution of hyper-cooperative multifamily groups that deployed lethal weapons to hold down hierarchy gave rise to
the particular cognitive and sociopolitical qualities of Homo
sapiens.
The increased encephalization in humans was an extension of a long primate evolutionary history of increased brain

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

size, usually associated with increased cognitive demands required by larger group size (Byrne and Whiten 1988; Dunbar
et al. 2010; Humphrey 1976; Jolly 1972).5 The argument presented here—which invokes coordinated collective action
in cooperative foraging, made possible by a combination of
interdependence and lethal weapons—extends this analysis
to explain human exceptionalism in the area of cognitive and
linguistic development.
This development in promoting egalitarian multimale/
multifemale bands explains the huge cognitive and linguistic advantage of humans over other species. The early students of human evolution interpreted human hypercognition
as a process of runaway sexual selection, in which intelligent
males were more successful in attracting mates but did not
otherwise contribute to the ﬁtness of band members. This was
the favored theory of Charles Darwin (1871), Ronald Fisher
(1930), and, more recently, Geoffrey Miller (2001) and many
others. Our reading of the evidence suggests that human hypercognition, despite the extreme energy costs of maintaining
a large brain, was ﬁtness enhancing because of increased cognitive and linguistic ability, which entailed heightened egalitarian leadership qualities. These leadership qualities increased
the ﬁtness of band members, who responded by ceding enhanced ﬁtness beneﬁts to leaders (Price and Van Vugt 2014).
The mating success of high-cognition males was thus
grounded in their contribution to the mean ﬁtness of band
members and, hence in the long run, to the evolutionary
success of ancestral humans. In a sense, hominins evolved to
ﬁll a cognitive niche that was relatively unexploited in the
early Pleistocene (Tooby and DeVore 1987). In the words of
Steven Pinker,
We suggest that the puzzle [of human hyper-cognition]
can be resolved with two hypotheses. The ﬁrst is that humans evolved to ﬁll the “cognitive niche,” a mode of survival characterized by manipulating the environment
through causal reasoning and social cooperation. The
second is that the psychological faculties that evolved to
prosper in the cognitive niche can be coopted to abstract
domains by processes of metaphorical abstraction and
productive combination, both vividly manifested in human
language. (Steven Pinker 2010:8993)

Cooperative Mothering and the Evolution
of Prosociality
In cooperative breeding, the care and provisioning of offspring is shared among group members. The standard estimate is that some 3% of mammals have some form of allomaternal care, but in the order Primates, this frequency rises
5. Group size is certainly not the whole story. Multimale/multifemale
monkey groups are often as large or larger than ape groups, although
the latter have much larger brains and are considerably more intelligent.
The full story concerning cephalization in mammals in general—and
primates in particular—remains to be told (Eisler et al. 2011).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

to 20% or more (Hrdy 2009, 2010). In many nonhuman primates and mammals in general, cooperative breeding is accompanied by generally heightened prosociality, as compared
with related species with purely maternal care. The most plausible explanation is that cooperative breeding leads to a social
structure that rewards prosocial behavior, which in turn leads
to changes in neural structure that predisposes individuals to
behaving prosocially (Burkart and van Schaik 2010; Burkart
et al. 2009). An alternative possibility is that there is some
underlying factor in such species that promotes prosociality
in general, of which collective breeding is one aspect.
Human prosociality was strongly heightened beyond that
of other primates living in large groups, including cooperative breeders, by virtue of the niche hominins occupied, which
involved coordination in scavenging and hunting and sophisticated norms for sharing meat. This combination might account for the degree of cooperative breeding in the hominin
line. As hominin brain size increased, the duration of immaturity did as well (Barrickman et al. 2008), and immatures had
to learn an increasingly large number of foraging and other
skills (Kaplan et al. 2000; Schuppli et al. 2012). Hominins
evolved a unique system of intergenerational transfers that
enabled the evolution of ever more complex cognitive abilities to support ever more complex subsistence skills (Kaplan
et al. 2007). Our uniquely prosocial shared intentionality (Tomasello et al. 2005) can be traced back to the psychological
changes involved in the evolution of cooperative breeding
and, additionally, hunting (Burkart et al. 2009).

Lethal Weapons and Egalitarian Political
Organization from the Holocene to the Present
In the Holocene, some Big Man societies have been relatively
egalitarian, such as those of highlands New Guinea, where the
Big Man serves the group in outfeasting other groups and
cannot transmit wealth or prestige to descendants. Other Big
Man societies are fully hierarchical, with prestige and power
being transmitted to future generations. The latter could have
led to chiefdoms (Flannery and Marcus 2012; Service 1975).
The slow but inexorable rise of the state—both as an instrument for exploiting direct producers and for protecting
them against the exploitation of external states and bands of
private or state-sanctioned marauders—was a synthesis of
these two types of Big Man sociopolitical systems (Andreski
1968; Gies 1984). The hegemonic aspirations of states peaked
in the thirteenth century, only be driven back by the series
of European population-decimating plagues of the fourteenth century. The period of state consolidation resumed
in the ﬁfteenth century, based on a new military technology:
the use of cannon. In this case, as in some other prominent
cases, technology becomes the handmaiden to establishing a
social dominance hierarchy based on force.
In Politics, Aristotle writes that “there are four kinds of
military forces—the cavalry, the heavy infantry, the light
armed troops, the navy. When the country is adapted for
cavalry, then a strong oligarchy is likely to be established

339

[because] only rich men can afford to keep horses. The second form of oligarchy prevails when the country is adapted
to heavy infantry; for this service is better suited to the rich
than to the poor. But the light-armed and the naval elements
are wholly democratic. . . . An oligarchy which raises such a
force out of the lower classes raises a power against itself
(1952:VI:vii).”
The use of cavalry became dominant in Western Europe
during the Carolingian period. The history of warfare from
the Late Middle Ages to the First World War was the saga of
the gradual increase in the strategic military value of infantry armed with longbow, crossbow, hand cannon, and pike,
which marked the recurring victories of the English and
Swiss over French and Spanish cavalry in the twelfth to ﬁfteenth centuries. Cavalries responded by developing dismounted tactics when encountering infantry, using heavy
hand weapons such as two-handed swords and poleaxes.
These practices extended the viability of cavalry to the sixteenth century in the French and Spanish armies, but gradually through the Renaissance and with the rise of Atlantic
trade, the feudal knightly warlords gave way to the urban
landed aristocracy, and warfare turned to the interplay of
mercenary armies consisting of easily trained foot soldiers
wielding muskets and other weapons based on gunpowder.
Cavalry remained important in this era, but even in the
eighteenth and nineteenth century, cavalry was used mainly
to execute the coup de grace on seriously weakened infantry.
The true hegemony of the foot soldier—and hence the
origins of modern democracy—began with the perfection
of the hand-held weapon, with its improved accuracy and
greater ﬁring rate than the primitive muskets of a previous
era. Until that point, infantry was highly vulnerable to attack
from heavy artillery. By the early twentieth century, the superiority of unskilled foot soldiers armed with riﬂes was assured. World War I opened in 1914 with substantial cavalry
on all sides, but mounted troops were soundly defeated by
men with riﬂes and machine guns and thus were abandoned
in later stages of the war. The strength of the political forces
agitating for political democracy in twentieth-century Europe was predicated on the strategic role of the foot soldier
in waging war and defending the peace (Bowles and Gintis
1986), simply because conscripted armies of foot soldiers
lacked the moral resolve to defend a society from whose governance they were systematically excluded.

Discussion
It is tempting to focus on the past several thousand years of
human cultural history in modeling human sociopolitical organization because the changes that occurred in this period
so radically and rapidly transformed the character of human
society (Pagel 2012; Richerson and Boyd 2004). However,
the basic genetic predispositions of humans underlying sociopolitical structure were forged over a much longer period
of time, whence the million plus year perspective offered in
this paper.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

340

Current Anthropology

The framework developed here is applicable to many
spheres of human social life, although we have applied it
only to the evolution of sociopolitical structure. The central
tool is gene-culture coevolution, which bids us to pay close
attention to the long-term dynamic interplay between our
phylogenetic constitution and our cultural heritage. The second important conceptual tool is the sociopsychological theory of norms. Many social scientists reject this theory because
it posits a causal social reality above the level of individual
actors. This position is sometimes termed methodological
individualism. Methodological individualism is not a philosophical, moral, or political principle but an assertion about
reality. As such, it is simply incorrect, because social norms
are an emergent property of human society, irreducible to
lower-level statements (Durkheim 1902; Gintis 2009). All attempts at explaining human culture without this higher-level
construct fail.
In this context, we have suggested the following scenario
for the long history of human sociopolitical dynamics. Our
primate ancestors evolved a complex sociopolitical order based
on a social dominance hierarchy in multimale/multifemale
groups. Enabled by bipedalism, environmental changes made
a diet of meat from large animals ﬁtness enhancing in the
hominin line. This—together with cultural innovation in the
domestication of ﬁre, the practices of cooking, and collective
childrearing—created a niche for hominins in which there
was a high return to coordinated, cooperative, and competitive scavenging as well as technology-based extractive foraging. This development was accompanied by the likely use of
clubs, spears, and long-range projectiles as lethal weapons and
also led to the spread of specialized bipedalism and the reorganization of the upper torso, shoulders, arms, and hands
to maximize the effectiveness of these weapons. There was
also a growth of new neural circuitry, allowing the rapid sequencing of bodily movements required for accurate weapon
deployment.
The hominin niche increasingly required sophisticated coordination of collective meat procurement, the occasional but
critical reliance on resources produced by others, a complementary willingness to provide others with resources, and
procedures for the fair sharing of meat and collective duties.
The availability of lethal weapons in early hominin society
could have helped to stabilize this system because it undermined the tendencies of dominants to exploit others in society. Thus, two successful sociopolitical structures arose to
enhance the ﬂexibility and efﬁciency of social cooperation in
humans and likely their hominin ancestors. The ﬁrst was the
reverse dominance hierarchy, which required a brain large
enough to enable a band’s rank and ﬁle to create effective
coalitions that could deﬁnitively put an end to alpha male
hegemony and replace this with a lasting egalitarian order.
Leaders were kept weak, and their reproductive success depended on an ability to persuade and motivate, coupled with
the rank-and-ﬁle ability to reach a consensus with such leadership. The second was cooperative childrearing and hunting,
which provided a strong psychological predisposition toward

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

prosociality and favored internalized norms of fairness. This
system persisted until cultural changes in the later Holocene
fostered material wealth accumulation, through which it became once again possible to sustain a social dominance hierarchy based on coercion.
This scenario has important implications for political theory and social policy because it suggests that humans are
predisposed to seek individual dominance when this is not
excessively costly and also to form coalitions to depose pretenders to power. Moreover, humans are much more capable
of forming large, powerful, and sustainable coalitions than
other primates because of our enhanced cooperative psychological propensities. Such coalitions also served to reinforce
the moral order as well as to promote cooperation in hunting,
warding off predators, and raiding other human bands. This
implies that many forms of sociopolitical organization are
compatible with the particular human amalgam of hierarchical and antihierarchical predispositions that can result in
either independent egalitarian bands or well-amalgamated
large societies.
In particular, this implies that there is no inevitable triumph of liberal democratic over despotic political hierarchies. The open society will always be threatened by the forces
of despotism, and a technology could easily arise that irremediably places democracy on the defensive. The future of
politics in our species, in the absence of concerted emancipatory collective action, could well be something akin to
George Orwell’s 1984 or Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World.
However, humans appear constitutionally indisposed to accept a social dominance hierarchy based on coercion unless
the coercive mechanism and its associated social processes
can be culturally legitimated. It is somewhat encouraging that
such legitimation is difﬁcult except in a few well-known ways
based on patriarchy, popular religion, or principles of liberal
democracy.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Samuel Bowles, Bernard Chapais, Michael Ghiselin,
James O’Connell, Peter Richerson, Joan Silk, Penny Spikins,
Peter Turchin, Mark Van Vugt, Polly Wiessner, and several
reviewers for helpful comments.

Comments
Bernard Chapais
Department of Anthropology, University of Montreal, P.O. Box
6128, Succursale Centre-ville, Montreal H3C 3J7, Canada
(bernard.chapais@umontreal.ca). 10 XI 14

The authors’ main argument concerns the origins of egalitarian societies and nonauthoritarian leadership, the “successful political structure that ultimately replaced the an-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

cestral social dominance hierarchy.” They suggest that this
system resulted from the combined effects of two factors: the
development of lethal weapons, which led to the suppression
of dominance based on physical prowess, and a marked
increase in cooperative activities and levels of social interdependence. These conditions would have favored the emergence of leaders able to motivate and persuade and selected
for “linguistic facility, political ability, and . . . hypercognition.”
The impact of lethal weapons on the dynamics of dominance relationships must have been profound indeed. As I
argued previously (Chapais 2008, 2011, 2013), weapons may
have played a major role in the evolution of human monogamy from a prior state of generalized polygyny: by decreasing discrepancies in physical power between males, weapons
would have substantially increased the costs of monopolizing
several females and led to a more egalitarian distribution of
females among males. Notwithstanding the effect of weapons, there is still a big gap between a social system featuring
high levels of social interdependence and low levels of physical dominance, on the one hand, and the emergence of human leadership, on the other. Nonauthoritarian leadership
stems from cooperation and is granted to leaders by followers, whereas authoritarian leadership (based on dominance)
stems from competition and is imposed by dominants on subordinates. The social processes and underlying psychologies
are fundamentally different. The authors are basically silent
about how that crucial transition was accomplished. As will
be argued here, nonauthoritarian leadership and the demise
of primate-like dominance may be two consequences of a
more basic phenomenon: the rise of competence-based social status (Chapais 2015).
As argued by Henrich and Gil-White (2001), highly skilled
individuals in various domains (from hunting to toolmaking
to shamanism) are admired, accorded privileges, preferentially copied, and spontaneously deferred to; in short, they
enjoy prestige. Henrich and Gil-White proposed that attraction to experts emerged with the human cultural capacity and was selected because it enabled followers to acquire
knowledge from experts. Alternatively, as I argue elsewhere
(Chapais 2015), attraction to experts may have originated in
the (presumably homologous) phenomenon of attraction to
high-ranking individual in primates and hence in cooperative partnerships involving an exchange of services and resources between experts and group members rather than
social learning beneﬁts. Upon the evolution of cumulative
culture and the ensuing proliferation of competence domains, the attractiveness of high rank would have been coopted to generate attraction to experts and competence-based
status differentials within each such domain.
Pronounced discrepancies in competence translate into
marked asymmetries in the degree to which experts and nonexperts may help each other satisfy their respective needs.
Competence discrepancies between cooperative partners thus
create dependence asymmetries, which in turn provide experts with various types of power, including passive inﬂuence
(being copied), active inﬂuence (being obeyed, sensu Milgram

341

[1974]; reviewed in Blass [1999]), bargaining power, leverage
(Bacharach and Lawler 1980; Chapais 1991; Lewis 2002), and
dependence-based coercive power (dominance) when experts
are in position to withhold knowledge, services, or resources
affecting others’ welfare (Chapais 2015). Thus, following the
evolution of cumulative culture and the diversiﬁcation of
power bases, it must have been commonplace for physically
weaker individuals to be more competent than stronger
individuals in several domains and hence to enjoy a higher
group-conferred status and higher levels of bargaining power
and dependence-based dominance. In such situations, bullies
trying to aggressively impose their will on skilled hunters,
toolmakers, or shamans ran the risk of not only losing valuable social partners but also hurting the favorite partners of
all group members and alienating the latter. At that stage in
human evolution, the impact of primate-like dominance in
human affairs would have been considerably diluted among
several other power bases. Note that this effect is independent of whether weapons were used or not.
Simultaneously, competence-based status would have set
the stage for nonauthoritarian leadership because leaders are
a particular subset of experts (Chapais 2015). As noted by the
authors, leaders are experts in coordination, with relevant
physical, psychological, and social competences (Boehm 1993;
van Vugt 2006). In that view, leadership by consent is only
one particular manifestation of competence-based status.
This suggests that the early political structure that replaced
the primate dominance hierarchy was a system in which
status was conferred by followers, competence was the key
to status, and the sources of power were highly diversiﬁed.
Nonauthoritarian leadership could emerge in such a context
(especially after the development of weapons) whenever complex cooperative activities favored leadership-based coordination. The advent of nested, multigroup social entities in the
evolution of human social organization—with their high requirements in terms of between-group and multigroup coordination (Chapais 2013, 2014)—would have rendered leadership particularly useful.

Jessica C. Flack
Center for Complexity and Collective Computation, Wisconsin
Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin, 330 North
Orchard Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, U.S.A., and Santa Fe
Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501,
U.S.A. (jﬂack@santafe.edu)

Social Niche Construction
Two long-standing assumptions in evolutionary biology are
that the genotype-phenotype map, as it is called, is simple
and that the time-scale on which the environment changes is
slow enough compared with behavioral change that it can be
treated as static and uncoupled to behavioral dynamics (the
adiabatic assumption).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

342

Current Anthropology

It is now well understood that the ﬁrst assumption is wrong
for most organisms—the gene activation patterns underlying
phenotypic traits are modulated by complex regulatory machinery that itself evolves—and the work of Eric Davidson
and coworkers on echinoderm development stands as an excellent example (e.g., Davidson 2010). This fundamental insight also applies in the case of social-cultural evolution,
where the output is social structure or institutions and the
input is behavioral strategies that are modiﬁed through learning rules (transmission mechanisms; e.g., van Schaik and Burkart 2011) and regulated through conﬂict management and
other control/robustness mechanisms (e.g., Boehm 2001;
Flack, Krakauer, and de Waal 2005; Flack et al. 2006; Frank
2003).
The second assumption, which if correct would justify
studying phenotypic and social development independently
from evolutionary dynamics, is problematic in any system
in which components (individuals, organisms, cells, etc.) can
modify environmental variables and, by modifying them,
change the selection pressures to which they are subject, as
in ecological (e.g., Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman 2003)
and social niche construction (Flack et al. 2006 [see also supplement]; Flack 2012b).
This modiﬁcation of the environment may be to the timescale on which an environmental variable changes, its trajectory through phase space, its distribution in space, or simply
its availability. By controlling these properties of environmental variables, an organism changes the selection pressure
to which it, as the constructor, and its offspring are subject.
This often comes in the form of a reduction of uncertainty.
The increased predictability of environmental variables allows constructors to better tune their decision-making strategies and hence better adapt (Flack and de Waal 2007; Flack
et al. 2013). When multiple individuals and species contribute
to modiﬁcation of environmental variables, the problem becomes one of collective social computation (Flack 2014; Flack
and Krakauer 2011): what are the collective effects of multiple individuals estimating and attempting to control regularities in their environments, and under what conditions can
this process produce predictable, regular ecological or social
environments?
With niche construction, collective computation, and advances in evo-devo, we are seeing the beginnings of an evolutionary theory that can account for the origins and diversity
of complex forms (for phenotypic examples, see Borenstein
and Krakauer 2008; Davidson and Erwin 2006; for social examples, see Flack 2012a, 2012b, 2014) as well as for causes of
gene and behavioral strategy change. The social evolution
community, which tends to be very functionally oriented, has
been slow to recognize these advances, as game theory, cultural evolution, and gene-culture coevolution—the primary
modeling and conceptual frameworks in social evolution—
have so far largely neglected the study of the feed-forward,
computational, collective process producing social structure
(Flack 2012a; Krakauer and Flack 2010). (Exceptions include

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

work on social insect societies [e.g., Page and Amdam 2007],
work on collective behavior and pattern formation in animal
societies [e.g., Couzin 2009], and the theoretical cooperation
literature emphasizing deriving macroscopic properties from
microscopic dynamics; see, for an example, the supplement of
Nowak, Tarnita, and Wilson 2010.) Required now are quantitative studies of the strategies individuals use to adaptively
modify the environment—whether social or ecological, how
these strategies are encoded in evolutionary or developmental time and how they combine to produce in, for example,
primate societies and egalitarian and other power structures
(e.g., Flack 2012b; Brush, Krakauer, and Flack 2013).
The importance of this perspective is illustrated by the
target article, “Zoon Politikon: The Evolutionary Origins of
Human Political Systems,” by Gintis, van Schaik, and Boehm.
The authors bring together multiple lines of evidence to argue that the temporal convergence of bipedalism, cooperative breeding, environmental changes allowing a high protein diet, and cultural innovations in the form of ﬁre and
cooking created a niche for hominins that favored coordinated, cooperative scavenging and hunting of large mammals
and led to egalitarian societies. The authors make a compelling and quite simple argument, despite weaving together
evidence from many sources. However, it is hard to work with
in its present form because it is coarse: the feed-forward social mechanics producing egalitarian social structure are not
speciﬁed, only hinted at. To develop testable hypotheses to
evaluate the “Zoon Politikon” framework, we need niche construction models that address how a change in the accessibility of interaction strategies—whether due to an increased
availability of processed protein, bipedialism, and/or cooperative breeding—changed the accessibility of egalitarian
and other social structures.

Mark Pagel
School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Reading
RG6 6BX, United Kingdom (m.pagel@reading.ac.uk). 10 XI 14

There are many attributes of Homo sapiens that could be said
to distinguish us from all other animals—attributes that make
us human—including language, sophisticated theory of mind,
morality, and justice systems. To these Gintis, van Schaik,
and Boehm add “a unique political dimension to human social life that, through gene-culture coevolution, became a human mental capacity intentionally to construct and reconstruct the social order. . . . The successful political structure
that ultimately replaced the ancestral social dominance hierarchy [of other primates] was an egalitarian political system in which the group controlled its leaders.”
It is difﬁcult to evaluate the long chain of causal events
these authors say led from our primate ancestors to this
unique mental capacity that gave rise to the political dimension of our existence, but they are surely right that there is

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

something special about human social relations: cooperative,
reciprocal, coalitional, ﬂuid, tribal, vindictive, and acutely
reputation based.
Add to this that we are able to pool our skills and knowledge and to trade and exchange goods and services. This
means we can beneﬁt from the collective wisdom of our societies and we have a history; our communities and societies accumulate ideas, knowledge, and technology. These latter features of human society have meant that, more than any
other species, our groups are vital to our life and well-being
(how much of the technology you enjoy could you create
on your own?), and no one individual can be said to be in
charge.
This, in turn, has instilled in us a probably unique group
psychology that includes the other-regarding traits Gintis
et al. describe, notably, a sense of fairness and justice in our
dealings with others and with our group. But these exist, I
suggest, not because we are innately fair or just but as valuable brakes on our tendencies to act selﬁshly (because to do
so risks being expelled from the group or even killed) and
to avoid being taken advantage of by others.
In a word, this psychology exists to make the group work
because individuals are better off with it than without it.
Thus, think of emotions, such as those associated with fairness and justice, as motivational states that natural selection
has built into us. They are vivid, salient, and never far from
our awareness. But they are not simple and robotic in their
application. We have an alarming ability to suspend or even
disregard the morality that we normally extend to members
of our own tribe when we confront members of other tribes
or even discover traitors in our own ranks; our so-called
morality, ironically, has probably led to some of the greatest
slaughters of modern times.
So, the picture that emerges of our species is a complicated
one. Yes, we have a sense of what Gintis et al. call “otherness,” but this probably should not be confused with being
an innately angelic and kind species. More likely is that we
are a shrewd and calculating species, such that our hypersocial brains and their sophisticated cognition enable us to
adjust our behavior to circumstances—kind and generous
when circumstances call for it, self-regarding and even brutal
when we can get away with it. The countering observation—
that we sometimes behave in other-regarding ways, even
when not being observed or immediately rewarded—is simply a measure of how strong our emotions, as motivational
states, are in getting us to behave in ways that will generally
reward us.
Gintis et al. are aware of this difﬁcult and calculating nature of our species. They paint a picture of egalitarian socialpolitical groupings in our hunter-gatherer past, shored up by
gene-culture coevolution that built these proclivities into us. But
they recognize that these allegedly egalitarian tendencies were
abandoned as soon as stored wealth became available with the
advent of farming and inequalities could emerge. So, it seems
that the hardwiring from gene-culture coevolution easily came

343

unraveled or perhaps was never there in quite the wiring
diagram they suggest (to be fair to Gintis et al., it is never
clear to me just what they do think has been wired into us by
gene-culture coevolution).
What does seem clear, though, is that sometime in our
past (my hunch is that it coincides roughly with the advent
of our species around 160,000–200,000 years ago; Pagel 2012)
we (somehow) acquired the cognitive skills that enabled a
ﬂuidity in our social relations, and it is this shrewdness—
be cooperative and other regarding when needed, be selfregarding when that works—that really characterizes the
hardwired political dimension of our cognition.

Jill D. Pruetz
Department of Anthropology, Iowa State University, 324 Curtiss
Hall, Ames, Iowa 50011, U.S.A. (pruetz@iastate.edu). 7 XI 14

Uniquely Human?
The authors outline the evolutionary origins of a sociopolitical human niche that is largely dependent on material culture, events such as control of ﬁre and cooking and the
consequences of these developments (biological as well as
cultural). They use a phylogenetic perspective to anchor their
premise, so that their hypothesis is based on the available
data on nonhuman primate behavior. However, detractors
may ﬁnd their scenario—which includes, in addition to those
traits listed above, active sharing, cooperative hunting and
breeding, lethal weapons and bipedal running—as another
“just so” story in paleoanthropology. Beginning with the section on the control of ﬁre, their premise becomes more speculative and rests on multiple levels of inference. Regardless, I
ﬁnd it provocative, and I anticipate it will lead to further reﬁnement of the various hypotheses.
I am particularly intrigued by the authors’ inclusion and
treatment of lethal weapons and hunting. Most of my criticisms are minor but could have important implications for
reﬁning their hypotheses. In general, their chimpanzee model
stems from research on the East African subspecies (Pan
troglodytes schweinfurthii), and I believe their hypotheses
would be strengthened by a more balanced assessment of Pan
as well as inclusion of key examples from other primates
(e.g., reversals in dominance systems; Sapolsky and Share
2004) and updated data on nonprimate species (e.g., wolves;
Smith and Ferguson 2012).
The authors’ focus on large prey ignores the potential
importance of smaller prey except during times of large-prey
scarcity. The inclusion of medium-sized and small prey surely
characterized the diet of early hominins as it does living humans that practice subsistence hunting, but it does not ﬁgure into the equation in bringing about a uniquely human
hominin. However, my real issue is with their assertion that
hunting and scavenging small animals is not cost effective

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

344

Current Anthropology

for large primates. Chimpanzees (males and females) at my
Fongoli study site in Senegal hunt as well as share the meat
of very small prey (i.e., Galago). The social implications of
such sharing indicate that large-mammal hunting was not a
prerequisite for behaviors that ultimately lead to the level of
cooperation seen in our species. This leads me to question
the hypothesis that a focus on large prey by hominins was
simply cost effective.
As the authors note, chimpanzees at my study site at
Fongoli, Senegal, use wooden tools to hunt their Galago prey
in tree cavities (Pruetz and Bertolani 2007), and these tools
could be considered weapons in the most primitive sense. I
have been able to record wounds on Galago prey inﬂicted by
such hunting tools, although this is usually difﬁcult to assess,
given the rapidity of their movement as well as the quickness
with which Fongoli chimpanzees kill them (usually with a
bite to the head, which is then ingested ﬁrst). In a nonhunting context, the savanna chimpanzees I study, like apes elsewhere, are quite capable of accurate, overhanded throwing
of projectiles (albeit from short distances and in a nonlethal
context), and, while rare, stone projectiles can be used effectively against other individuals, including higher-ranking apes
(and in conﬂicts with baboons and spotted hyenas). Similar
to chimpanzees at Tai Forest, Ivory Coast (Boesch 2009),
Fongoli apes have been observed to use weapons to attack
leopards (Jill D. Pruetz and Kelly M. Boyer, unpublished
manuscript). In our case, an older female with a ventral
infant and an older male led the attack on a leopard hiding
in a cave while the rest of the large social party looked on.
These individuals were able to ultimately chase the leopard
from its hiding place. Such observations make me question
the point that powerful weapons would be needed to kill a
predator when in fact driving them away would appear to be
just as cost effective. There are a number of similar points
that I found contradictory in the scenario, but reconstructing
the hominin niche is understandably a complex process.
In general, I assert that most of the traits considered to be
uniquely human, in fact, are likely shared with other primate
species. Besides linguistic abilities of persuasion, almost every trait described could be rooted phylogenetically in our
order. I appreciate the authors’ assertion that, in order to
better understand aspects of human evolution, anthropologists must recognize shared as well as uniquely derived traits.
This necessary part of the process of phylogenetic analysis
is often neglected, especially in recent years following the
criticism of the chimpanzee model. However, without such a
step, understanding human behavioral uniqueness becomes
a guessing game and almost purely speculative. Throughout
the paper, I would make additional speciﬁc criticisms regarding the authors’ need to more accurately anchor their
phylogenetic reconstruction of behavior using data from extant nonhuman primate species, but I applaud their efforts
and anticipate that proponents and detractors alike will reﬁne it.

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

Penny Spikins
Department of Archaeology, University of York, King’s Manor,
York YO1 7EP, United Kingdom (penny.spikins@york.ac.uk).
12 XI 14

Gintis, van Shaik, and Boehm marshal an array of different
lines of evidence to put forward a convincing case for the
role of political life in the emergence of distinctive human
social systems. In particular, they argue that the creation of
potentially lethal weapons played a key role in the evolution
of human egalitarian social/political systems, suppressing the
potential for physical dominance and promoting prosocial
tendencies. In their view, the origins of such systems lie in
social changes occurring more than a million years ago, perhaps as far as 3 or 4 million years in the past, with their continuing inﬂuence being felt today.
Their argument ﬁts with growing tendencies to trace human social systems much further back than the origins of
our own species. Moreover, their perspectives align with a
growing awareness that the social elements of human systems may have been much more signiﬁcant in human success than the technological and that early humans may have
been far more other regarding than we have assumed. Nonetheless, an emphasis on the development of weapons (an external material construction unique to humans) and the inﬂuence of weapons on the emerging moral basis to human
societies is novel, adding a new element to a recent move to
such perspectives, as does their appreciation of the potential
antiquity of a variability of human social/political systems.
The evidence for early use of weapons to support this argument is a little more scanty than we might like. In particular, evidence for weapons is circumstantial until 500,000
years ago, when we see impact marks from spears on hunted
animals at sites such as Boxgrove in the United Kingdom, and
slightly later, around 400,000 years, when we see preserved
weapons themselves (wooden spears) at Shoningen in Germany. Nonetheless, it is hard to imagine the appropriate
preservation or extent of wear to ever give us sufﬁcient evidence for weapons before this period. Handaxes are most
clearly butchery tools unlikely to be used as killing weapons,
and ﬂakes used in ad hoc fashion are conversely unlikely to
leave wear traces from use. Moreover, the most likely weapons would be wooden spears, unlikely to be preserved any
earlier in the archaeological record. With evidence for early
access to carcasses and potentially hunting from at least 1.8
million years ago (Bunn and Gurtov 2014) plus evidence that
even spheroids at sites such as Olduvai would have been used
as weapons, the antiquity of such lethal weapons seems entirely supportable, and social inferences likewise.
As the authors hypothesize, social changes appear to occur
alongside economic developments not only directly through
the social impact of lethal weapons themselves but also
through a greater emphasis on hunting, with the need for
sharing of meat and the control of ﬁre for cooking. These

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

economic developments set in place a social system entirely
distinct from other primates and one that fostered social
sharing norms. A suite of changes including increasing collaboration, alloparenting, and hominin encephalization cooccur. While Gintis et al. are certainly not alone in linking
these many different social changes and ﬁnding their basis in
inferences about the social systems of the last common ancestor (Whiten and Erdal 2012), they add elements unique
to humans (the use of shaped stone tools and of ﬁre) to the
equation.
If there is an area I would have like to have seen developed
further, it is that of how, though acting on individuals, selection pressures acted to produce the other focus of social
cognition so central to the political system proposed. Whereas
biological evolution illustrates many changes of tack and even
reversals, cognitive evolution seems to follow a route of increasing complexity that perhaps remains to be explained.
Nowak and Sigmund (2005), for example, refer to the ratchet
effect caused by indirect reputation in placing greater selection pressure on increases in intelligence. Conversely, Nesse
(2007) stresses the role of displays of emotional commitment
to others’ interests and the possibility of runaway social selection for signals of altruism in human evolution, and I have
stressed the role of material objects (the very weapons themselves) in providing lasting markers of reputation (Spikins
2012, 2015).
As with any stimulating paper addressing a complex and
important issue, we are bound to ﬁnd ourselves asking more
questions. We are left wondering, for example, how the evolution of social tolerance toward external groups evolved in
settings of potentially lethal violence (e.g., see Cieri et al
2014). Perhaps most signiﬁcantly, we cannot help but ponder in particular the relevance of innate egalitarian tendencies to modern society, with its tenuous justiﬁcation for impositions of dominance.

Andrew Whiten and David Erdal
Centre for Social Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of
Psychology and Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9JP, United Kingdom/School of Management,
University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9RJ, United
Kingdom (a.whiten@st-andrews.ac.uk). 5 XI 14

The Deep Social Mind of Humans and
the Ancestral Sociocognitive Niche
In recent years, an unprecedented richness of evidential
material has become available bearing on the evolutionary
shaping of the human mind, from sources as diverse as the
archaeology of hominid fossils and artefacts, comparative
genomics, ethnographies of recent hunting-gathering peoples, and the comparative method applied to nonhuman pri-

345

mates. This affords the prospect of unrivaled cross-disciplinary
analyses illuminating human evolution, yet the volume of
data available now exceeds the ability of any single author
or team to fully assimilate and synthesize it. Nevertheless—
and excitingly—a cluster of analyses sharing this aspiration
has been published in recent years; they usefully overlap with
Gintis et al. and with each other in scope, each incorporating perspectives and major sources of evidence lacking in the
others (Boyd, Richerson, and Henrich 2011; Pinker 2010;
Sterelny 2012; Tomasello et al. 2012; Whiten and Erdal 2012).
Read together, this corpus offer a new depth of understanding in respect of the evolution of human nature.
Our contribution (Whiten and Erdal 2012) converges in
several signiﬁcant respects with the analysis of Gintis et al.
in its conclusions, notably concerning the special, coupled
features of egalitarianism and hyper-cooperation that underwrote the big-game hunter-gatherer niche that so signiﬁcantly
molded human evolution. However, our analysis incorporated other elements that we see as important omissions in
that of Gintis. We inferred ﬁve major pillars characterizing
human deep social mind, enmeshed in an evolutionary sociocognitive niche (ﬁg. 1): hyper-cooperation, egalitarianism, cumulative culture, language, and mind reading (i.e., theory of
mind). Gintis et al. make no mention of the latter and only
minimal reference to language. We argue that together these
ﬁve pillars formed a powerfully synergistic, adaptive complex in which positive feedbacks operated between all of them
(ﬁg. 1). Mind reading, for example (attribution of states of
mind, such as beliefs and desires), means that the minds of
a hunter-gatherer band interpenetrate and in a signiﬁcant
sense form an integrated group mind that—in concert with
the other sociocognitive pillars—allows the band to operate
as a unitary, coherent predatory organism (in the broadest
sense, including both gathering and hunting) that can more
than successfully compete with professional predators, like
the African big cats. There are similarly powerful reinforcing
links between all of the nine paired relationships that link the
ﬁve pillars we identify (ﬁg. 1), which together justify labeling
the human niche sociocognitive rather than simply cognitive
(Whiten and Erdal 2012).
We agree with Gintis et al. that the legacy of our peculiar
evolutionary past appears to be a social mind that incorporates
a distinctive mixture of egalitarian and antiegalitarian dispositions. Our own detailed combing of 24 hunter-gatherer
ethnographies consistently revealed egalitarian, generalized
sharing of meat across the band together with a consistent
lack of chiefs and ﬂattened hierarchical structure (Erdal and
Whiten 1996). After the hierarchies of ancestral ape societies,
the vast length of this hunter-gatherer egalitarian phase—
spanning many hundreds of thousands of years and active
until as recently as the rise of horticulture around ∼10,000
years ago—likely explains our species’ capacity for charity
and concern with fairness. History is replete with the hubris
of dominant leaders—after storable wealth enabled them to

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

346

Current Anthropology

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

Figure 1. Five pillars of hunter-gatherer deep social mind and some illustrative positive feedbacks between them (after Whiten and
Erdal 2012). Deep social mind refers to these mental attributes (hyper-cooperation, egalitarianism, cumulative culture, language,
and mind reading) speciﬁcally; sociocognitive niche refers to the adaptive embedding of this complex within the hunting-gathering
way of life.

consolidate control—but also with countless rebellions expressing the evolved human desire for fairness, which only
collaborative resistance to domination can sustain. Democracy itself can perhaps be regarded as a cultural elaboration
of this hunter-gatherer legacy. In any case, the ethnographies
draw a consistent picture of group-level decision-making
shaped by such elements as persuasiveness rather than the
impositions of a dominating leader.
Indeed, the paper’s use of a leader-follower dichotomy is
inaccurate, according to our researches (Erdal and Whiten
1996). We found that simple forager bands do not institutionalize leadership, individuals remain autonomous, and whose
suggestion is followed varies by situation and time, with arrogantly expressed proposals from anyone typically simply not
accepted.
We also remain critical of Boehm’s continued reference to
reverse dominance as the social pressure sustaining huntergatherer egalitarianism. The ethnographies we combed described band members’ resistance to any self-aggrandizing
dispositions as most commonly occurring through relatively
benign and subtle maneuvers, like mocking and ridicule.
Rather than reversing an existing rank order, such behavior
typically leveled or ﬂattened status relationships, preventing
even the most competent from gaining dominance but not
imposing dominance on them. Accordingly, we advocated
“counter dominance” as a more apt term for the key political
tactic in egalitarian bands (Erdal and Whiten 1994), and we
urge the authors to recognize more consistently the distinction
we draw, as they do ﬂeetingly in writing “dominance aspirations are successfully countered.” This is neutralizing a hierarchy, not reversing it.
The rich multidisciplinary discoveries that Gintis et al. cited
and strive to synthesize are too important for our under-

standing of our evolved social and political minds to be interpreted in any fashion but the most objective.

Reply
We welcome the comments on our paper “Zoon Politikon:
The Evolutionary Origins of Human Political Systems,” and
we gratefully accept the commentators’ useful observations.
We here restrict ourselves to a few points worthy of additional clariﬁcation.
Bernard Chapais suggests that “nonauthoritarian leadership and the demise of primate-like dominance may be two
consequences of a more basic phenomenon: the rise of
competence-based social status.” We do not doubt the importance of competence-based social status (Chapais 2015;
Henrich and Gil-White 2001), and we understand that social
norms favoring competence were likely strong contributors
to human hypercognition in general and prosocial leadership in particular. However, group evaluations of leaders
could not be effective before leadership based on force was
overturned, and such overturning, we argued, was due to the
availability of lethal weapons and interdependence. The collapse of forceful dominance may have led simply to the
failure of social coordination in many bands, but at least in
some hominin lines the evolutionary successful path—in response to the high returns to collaborative interactions (Tomasello 2014), probably accompanying the adoption of
cooperative breeding (Burkart et al. 2009)—was an acutely
developed theory of mind needed to support these interactions (Baron-Cohen 1991), along with the ability of humans

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

to evaluate and value exactly the sorts of technical and social
competence to which Chapais refers.
Mark Pagel writes, “A sense of fairness and justice in our
dealings with others and with our group . . . exist, I suggest,
not because we are innately fair or just but as valuable brakes
on our tendencies to act selﬁshly . . . and to avoid being taken
advantage of by others . . . this psychology exists . . . because
individuals are better off with it than without it.”
However, we never suggested that humans are innately
fair or just. Rather, we said that humans have an evolved
nature that is predisposed to understand the notion of social
norm, to evaluate social norms according to legitimacy criteria, and to conform to social norms when they are considered legitimate. These predispositions are actualized through
complex but imperfect sociocultural interactions (Bowles and
Gintis 2011), and they must be protected by the sanctioning of
rule violators (Boyd et al. 2010).
Moral principles doubtless serve individual ﬁtness by inducing individuals to avoid social sanctions on selﬁsh behavior (Gintis 2003a, 2003b). However, we know of no plausible
social process whereby having a sense of fairness would protect against being exploited by others. This is because in a
population of individuals who punish exploiters at a cost to
themselves, a free rider can always do better by not punishing. There are cogent models in which individuals punish
unfair behavior in order to establish a reputation for hard
bargaining that would be useful in future interactions. But
this is purely self-regarding behavior requiring no moral dimension.
Pagel claims that this moral sense exists “because individuals are better off with it than without it.” We would amend
this to say that individuals have evolved a moral sense because
social groups that reward prosocial behavior and punish antisocial behavior enhance the ﬁtness of their members better
and last longer than societies that do not, and in such societies, individuals with a strong moral sense have higher ﬁtness
than amoral individuals. This does not mean, however, that
humans behave prosocially only because they are appropriately rewarded for such behavior. Indeed, were that the case,
as we suggested in “Zoon Politikon,” even moral individuals
would not vote in large elections and would not participate
in the sorts of collective actions against tyranny from which
our contemporary freedoms arose.
Pagel further suggests that
we are a shrewd and calculating species . . . kind and generous when circumstances call for it, self-regarding and
even brutal when we can get away with it. The countering
observation—that we sometimes behave in other-regarding
ways, even when not being observed or immediately rewarded—is simply a measure of how strong our emotions,
as motivational states, are in getting us to behave in ways
that will generally reward us.

In other words, it is usually so strongly in one’s interest to
follow socially approved behavior that it is not worthwhile

347

evaluating each particular social situation for one’s ability to
behave selﬁshly with impunity because the costs of making a
mistake can be very high. There are no doubt situations in
which this view is plausible. For instance, one may stop for a
red light even if no cars are coming and no policeman is in
sight because perhaps there is a police car hidden from view.
Getting caught even one time in 20 many not be worth the
effort of discrimination. It is thus prudent simply to stop for
a red light unconditionally. Similarly, we know that the level
of tax compliance in the United States is much higher than
self-interested taxpayers would choose (Andreoni et al. 1998),
but doubtless some taxpayers simply want to avoid any possibility of being audited. However, in cases where serious moral choices must be made—such as harming, robbing, and
killing others—this theory is implausible.
Perhaps the biggest problem is with moral actions that involve zero or very small social sanctions. This includes most
forms of political participation, including voting, becoming
politically knowledgeable, contributing to a campaign fund,
and participating in a collective action. It also applies to moral
actions that are prosocial but are not publicly monitored, such
as giving to charity and being kind to strangers. Finally, the
notion that men refrain from killing and raping only because
they are afraid that their deeds will be detected does not describe human psychology very well. Of course, some men are
quite capable of these acts, but they occur in high frequency
only when the social fabric is deeply weakened.
Pagel’s emphasis on cognitive evaluation of the costs and
beneﬁts of social actions is not strongly supported by the recent emergence of strong emotional underpinnings of social
actions (e.g., Haidt 2012) The internalization of prosocial
norms may well serve the individual’s interest, when the
damage to reputation of being detected in selﬁsh, antisocial
acts is so high that the threshold for engaging in such acts
must be made very high, purely to protect the individual’s
selﬁsh interests (Gintis 2003a).
The notion of humans as shrewd but asocial creatures that
respond only to sanctions and rewards is also belied by the
fact that humans show all the signs of self-domestication that
have been observed in species domesticated by humans.
Darwin himself noticed that selectively breeding mammals
for tameness leads to similar side effects in several distinct
species. He then suggests that man himself “may be compared
with those animals which have been long domesticated”
(Darwin 1871, ch. 7). Belyaev (1979) corroborated this insight, studying captive silver foxes bred for tameness. These
animals developed humanly attractive faces with short snouts,
ﬂoppy ears, patches of white fur on their heads, and curly
tails (Gibbons 2014). More recently, Cieri et al. (2014) documented domesticated syndrome changes in human evolution since the Middle Stone Age and Upper Paleolithic, and
Wilkins et al. (2014) have proposed a general genetic model
explaining the domestication phenomenon.
This is evidence for a very straightforward culture-led
group selection mechanism in which an increasingly complex

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

348

Current Anthropology

division of labor and social norms that rewarded cooperation
(Tomasello 2014) favored genetic changes that produced a
more domesticated and prosocial human disposition.
Andrew Whiten and David Erdal write: “We inferred
ﬁve major pillars characterizing human deep social mind,
enmeshed in an evolutionary sociocognitive niche: hypercooperation, egalitarianism, cumulative culture, language, and
mind reading (i.e., theory of mind). Gintis et al. make no
mention of the latter and only minimal reference to language.”
Whiten and Erdal are correct, and any general model of
human evolution must include language and mind reading.
These factors are of foundational importance, and they nicely
complement our analysis, which was rather streamlined to
deal with sociopolitical issues. We would have done well to
refer to their paper (Whiten and Erdal 2012), which we had
not yet read.
Our analysis stresses the great potential gains from social
coordination facing early hominins. Cooperative scavenging
and hunting were possible because humans developed what
Michael Tomasello has called collective intentionality, of
which the ability to predict how others are thinking and
hence how they are likely to react to contingencies is a
central element. Individuals with superior ability to contribute to group goals by such ﬂexible adaptation would be
welcome members in a collaborative effort and would
thereby enjoy enhanced biological ﬁtness. Similarly, communicative facility is a highly valued personal trait in a
group where complex collaboration is the key to success, and
there are many paths from social value to individual biological ﬁtness. The dramatic physiological changes in facial
and tongue musculature—in the positioning of the larynx in
the throat and in related instruments of vocal communication
—were most likely individual adaptations to the ﬁtness beneﬁts of social collaboration.
Whiten and Erdal also claim that our “use of a leaderfollower dichotomy is inaccurate. . . . We found that simple
forager bands do not institutionalize leadership, individuals
remain autonomous, and whose suggestion is followed varies
by situation and time, with arrogantly expressed proposals
from anyone typically simply not accepted.”
We agree with Whiten and Erdal’s ﬁndings and did not
suggest otherwise. We often refer to leaders and followers,
but we do not suggest that band leaders are a distinct group
of individuals who maintain their status over time or that
leaders are ever followed without the consent of the followers.
Finally, Whiten and Erdal are critical of Boehm’s continued reference to reverse dominance as the social pressure sustaining hunter-gatherer egalitarianism. The ethnographies we combed described band members’ resistance to any
self-aggrandizing dispositions as most commonly occurring
through relatively benign and subtle maneuvers, like mocking
and ridicule. Rather than reversing an existing rank order, such
behavior typically leveled or ﬂattened status relationships,
preventing even the most competent from gaining dominance
but not imposing dominance on them.

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

We agree with Whiten and Erdal’s description of the relationship between leaders and followers, except that evidence from contemporary hunter-gatherer groups supports
our description of followers being dominant over leaders,
not in the sense that leaders are coerced against their will to
lead but rather in that the incentives imposed by followers
on leaders effectively counter their capacity to act against the
interests of the group. The term “reverse dominance” accurately describes a situation in which the position of leaders
is determined by the will of the followers. Followers dominate leaders in the sense that the position of the leader,
despite the fact that he may beneﬁt greatly from his leadership position, is continually subject to reassessment and
recall by followers.
Despite the rarity of severe, weaponized sanctioning of bullies, in the long run it serves an important role in reverse dominance hierarchy. In a sample of 50 mobile hunter-gatherers
chosen for their appropriateness for Late-Pleistocene modeling, Boehm (2014) found that nearly half reported incidences of capital punishment, and by far the leading cause
was that a male was trying to intimidate his fellow hunters
either physically or supernaturally. All of these societies were
egalitarian. In fact, the Calusa of Florida stand out as the
only mobile hunter-gatherers that are decisively hierarchical.
—Herbert Gintis, Carel van Schaik,
and Christopher Boehm

References Cited
Alexander, Richard D. 1974. The evolution of social behavior. Annual Review
of Ecology and Systematics 5:325–383.
———. 1987. The biology of moral systems. New York: Aldine.
Alperson-Aﬁl, Nira. 2008. Continual ﬁre-making by hominins at Gesher
Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Quaternary Science Reviews 27:1733–1739.
Ambrose, Stanley H. 2008. Small things remembered: origins of early
microlithic industries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Archeological Papers of the
American Anthropological Association 12(1):9–29.
Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein. 1998. Tax compliance. Journal of Economic Literature 36(2):818–860.
Andreski, Stanislav. 1968. Military organization and society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ardrey, Robert. 1997 (1966). The territorial imperative: a personal inquiry
into the animals, origins of property and nations. New York: Kodansha
America.
Aristotle. 1952. Politics. In The works of Aristotle, vol. 8. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica.
———. 2002 (350 BC). Nicomachean ethics. Newburyport, MA: Focus
Publishing.
Bacharach, Michael. 2006. Beyond individual choice: teams and games in
game theory. Natalie Gold and Robert Sugden, eds. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Bacharach, S. B., and E. J. Lawler. 1980. Power and politics in organizations.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. [BC]
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. 1992. The adapted
mind: evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Baron-Cohen, Simon. 1991. Precursors to a theory of mind: understanding
attention in others. In Natural theories of mind: evolution, development
and simulation of everyday mindreading. Andrew Whiten, ed. Pp. 233–
251. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Barrickman, N. L., M. L. Bastian, K. Isler, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2008. Life
history costs and beneﬁts of encephalization: a comparative test using
data from long-term studies of primates in the wild. Journal of Human
Evolution 54:568–590.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

Belyaev, D. K. 1979. Destabilizing selection as a factor in domestication.
Journal of Heredity 70:301–308.
Binford, Lewis. 1985. Human ancestors: changing views of their behavior.
Journal of Anthropology and Archeology 4:292–327.
Bingham, Paul, and Joanne Souza. 2009. Death from a distance and the birth
of a humane universe: human evolution, behavior, history, and your future.
Charleston: BookSurge Publishing.
Bingham, Paul M. 1999. Human uniqueness: a general theory. Quarterly
Review of Biology 74(2):133–169.
Bissonnette, Annie, Mathias Franz, Oliver Schülke, and Julia Ostnera. 2014.
Socioecology, but not cognition, predicts male coalitions across primates.
Behavioral Ecology 25(4):794–801, doi:10.1093/beheco/aru054.
Blass, T. 1999. The Milgram paradigm after 35 years: some things we now
know about obedience to authority. Journal of Applied Social Psychology
29:955–978. [BC]
Blumenschine, Robert J., John A. Cavallo, and Salvatore D. Capaldo. 1994.
Competition for carcasses and early hominid behavioral ecology: a case
study and conceptual framework. Journal of Human Evolution 27:197–
213.
Blurton-Jones, Nicholas G. 1987. Tolerated theft: suggestions about the
ecology and evolution of sharing, hoarding, and scrounging. Social Science
Information 26(1):31–54.
Boëda, E., J. M. Geneste, C. Griggo, N. Mercier, and S. Muhesen. 1999. A
Levallois point embedded in the vertebra of a wild ass (Equus africanus):
hafting, projectiles and Mousterian hunting weapons. Antiquity 73:394–
402.
Boehm, Christopher. 1993. Egalitarian behavior and reverse dominance hierarchy. Current Anthropology 34(3):227–254.
———. 1994. Pacifying interventions at Arnhem Zoo and Gombe. In
Chimpanzee cultures. Richard W. Wrangham, W. C. McGrew, Frans B. M.
de Waal, and Paul G. Heltne, eds. Pp. 211–226. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
———. 1997. Impact of the human egalitarian syndrome on Darwinian
selection. American Naturalist 150(suppl.):S100–S121.
———. 1999. Hierarchy in the forest: evolution of egalitarian behavior.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. [JCF]
———. 2000. Conﬂict and the evolution of social control. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7:79–183.
———. 2004. What makes humans economically distinctive? A threespecies evolutionary comparison and historical analysis. Journal of Bioeconomics 6(2):109–135.
———. 2012. Moral origins: the evolution of virtue, altruism, and shame.
New York: Basic Books.
———. 2013. The biocultural evolution of conﬂict resolution between
groups. In War, peace, and human nature: the convergence of evolutionary
and cultural views. D. P. Fry, ed. Pp. 315–340. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2014. The moral consequences of social selection. Behaviour 51:
167–183.
Boehm, Christopher, and Jessica C. Flack. 2010. The emergence of simple
and complex power structures through social niche construction. In Social
psychology of power. Ana Guinote and Theresa K. Vescio, eds. Pp. 46–86.
New York: Guilford.
Boesch, C. 2009. The real chimpanzee: sex strategies in the forest. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. [JDP]
Boesch, Christophe, and Hedwige Boesch-Achermann. 2000. The chimpanzees of the Täı Forest: behavioral ecology and evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Boesch, Christophe, Gottfried Hohmann, and Linda Marchant. 1998. Behavioural diversity in chimpanzees and bonobos. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Boesch, Christophe, Grégoire Kohou, Honora Néné, and Linda Vigilant.
2006. Male competition and paternity in wild chimpanzees of the Tai
Forest. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 130:103–115.
Borenstein, E., and D. C. Krakauer. 2008. End to endless forms: regulatory
epistasis, phenotype distribution bias, and non-uniform evolution. PLoS
Computational Biology 4:1–13. [JCF]
Borgerhoff Mulder, Monique, Samuel Bowles, Tom Hertz, and Adrian Bell.
2009. Intergenerational wealth transmission and the dynamics of inequality in small-scale societies. Science 326:682–688.
Bowles, Samuel. 2006. Group competition, reproductive leveling, and the
evolution of human altruism. Science, December.

349
———. 2007. Genetic differentiation among hunter gatherer groups. Santa
Fe: Santa Fe Institute.
———. 2009. Did warfare among ancestral hunter-gatherer groups affect
the evolution of human social behaviors. Science, June.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1986. Democracy and capitalism:
property, community, and the contradictions of modern social thought.
New York: Basic Books.
———. 2011. A cooperative species: human reciprocity and its evolution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boyd, Robert, Herbert Gintis, and Samuel Bowles. 2010. Coordinated punishment of defectors sustains cooperation and can proliferate when rare.
Science, April.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the evolutionary
process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, Robert, Peter J. Richerson, and Joseph Henrich. 2011. The cultural
niche: why social learning is essential for human adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108:10918–10925.
[AW/DE]
Boyd, Robert, and Joan Silk. 2002. How humans evolved. 3rd edition. New
York: Norton.
Bramble, Dennis M., and Daniel E. Lieberman. 2004. Endurance running
and the evolution of Homo. Nature 432(7015):345–352.
Bratman, Michael E. 1993. Shared intention. Ethics 104(1):97–113.
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human universals. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Brush, E. R., D. C. Krakauer, and J. C. Flack. 2013. A family of algorithms for
computing consensus about node state from network data. PLoS Computational Biology 9: e1003109. [JCF]
Bunn, H. T., and A. N. Gurtov. 2014. Prey mortality proﬁles indicate that
Early Pleistocene Homo at Olduvai was an ambush predator. Quaternary
International 322:44–53. [PS]
Burkart, J. M., and Carel P. van Schaik. 2010. Cognitive consequences of
cooperative breeding in primates. Animal Cognition 13:1–19.
Burkart, Judith M., Sarah B. Hrdy, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2009. Cooperative breeding and human cognitive evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology
18(5):175–186.
Byrne, Richard, and Andrew Whiten. 1988. Machiavellian intelligence: social
expertise and the evolution of intellect in monkeys, apes, and humans.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Calvin, William H. 1983. A stone’s throw and its launch window: timing
precision and its implications for language and hominid brains. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 104(1):121–135.
Camerer, Colin. 2003. Behavioral game theory: experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Camerer, Colin, and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. Ultimatums, dictators, and
manners. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2):209–219.
Cameron, Lisa A. 1999. Raising the stakes in the Ultimatum Game: experimental evidence from Indonesia. Economic Inquiry 37(1):47–59.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca, and Marcus W. Feldman. 1973. Models for cultural inheritance: within group variation. Theoretical Population Biology
42(4):42–55.
———. 1981. Cultural transmission and evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Chapais, B. 1991. Primates and the origins of aggression, power, and politics
among humans. In Understanding behavior: what primate studies tell us
about human behavior. J. D. Loy and C. B. Peters, eds. Pp. 190–228. New
York: Oxford University Press. [BC]
———. 2008. Primeval kinship: how pair-bonding gave birth to human society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2011. The evolutionary history of pair-bonding and parental collaboration. In The Oxford handbook of evolutionary family psychology. C.
Salmon and T. Shackelford, eds. Pp. 33–50. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. [BC]
———. 2013. Monogamy, strongly-bonded groups, and the evolution of
human social structure. Evolutionary Anthropology 22:52–65. [BC]
———. 2014. Complex kinship patterns as evolutionary constructions, and
the origins of sociocultural universals. Current Anthropology 55(6):755–
783. [BC]
———. 2015. Competence, and the evolutionary origins of status and power
in humans. Human Nature. Forthcoming.
Churchill, Steven E., and J. A. Rhodes. 2009. The evolution of the human
capacity for “killing at a distance”: the human fossil evidence for the
evolution of projectile weaponry. In The evolution of hominin diets: in-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

350

Current Anthropology

tegrating approaches to the study of Palaeolithic subsistence. J. J. Hublin
and M. P. Richards, eds. Pp. 201–210. Berlin: Springer.
Cieri, Robert L., Steven E. Churchill, Robert G. Franciscus, Jingzhi Tan, and
Brian Hare. 2014. Craniofacial feminization, social tolerance, and the
origins of behavioral modernity. Current Anthropology 55(4):419–443.
Clutton-Brock, T. H. 1974. Primate social organization and ecology. Nature
250:539–542.
———. 2009. Cooperation between non-kin in animal societies. Nature 462:
51–57.
Couzin, I. D. 2009. Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13:36–43. [JCF]
Darlington, P. J. 1975. Group selection, altruism, reinforcement and throwing in human evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA 72:3748–3752.
Dart, Raymond A. 1925. Australopithecus africanus: the man-ape of South
Africa. Nature 115(2884):195–199.
Darwin, Charles. 1859. The origin of species by means of natural selection.
6th edition. London: Murray.
———. 1871. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. London:
Murray.
Davidson, E. H. 2010. Emerging properties of animal gene regulatory networks. Nature 468:911–920, doi:10.1038/nature09645. [JCF]
Davidson, E. H., and D. H. Erwin. 2006. Gene regulatory networks and the
evolution of body plans. Science 311:796–800. [JCF]
de Waal, Frans. 1996. Good natured: the origins of right and wrong in humans and other animals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1997. Bonobo: the forgotten ape. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
———. 1998. Chimpanzee politics: sex and power among the apes. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Dediu, Dan, and Stephen C. Levinson. 2013. On the antiquity of language:
the reinterpretation of Neanderthal linguistic capacities and its consequences. Frontiers in Psychology 4:397, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00397.
deMenocal, Peter. 2011. Climate and human evolution. Science 331:540–542.
d’Errico, F., Lucinda Backwell, Paola Villa, Ilaria Degano, Jeannette J. Lucejko, Marion K. Bamford, Thomas F. G. Higham, Maria Perla Colombini,
and Peter B. Beaumont. 2012. Early evidence of San material culture represented by organic artifacts from Border Cave, South Africa. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 109(33):13214–13219.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius. 1963. Cultural direction of human evolution. Human Biology 35:311–316.
Dominguez-Rodrigoa, M., and R. Barba. 2006. New estimates of tooth mark
and percussion mark frequencies at the FLK Zinj Site: the carnivorehominid-carnivore hypothesis falsiﬁed. Journal of Human Evolution 50
(2):170–194.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An economic theory of democracy. Boston: Harper &
Row.
Dunbar, Robin M. 2005. The human story. New York: Faber & Faber.
Dunbar, Robin M., Clive Gamble, and John A. J. Gowlett. 2010. Social brain,
distributed mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Durkheim, Emile. 1902. The division of labor in society. New York: Free
Press.
Edlin, Aaron, Andrew Gelman, and Noah Kaplan. 2007. Voting as a rational
choice: why and how people vote to improve the well-being of others.
Rationality and Society 19(3):293–314.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus. 1989. Human ethology. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Eisenberg, J. F., N. A. Muckenhirn, and R. Rudran. 1972. The relation between ecology and social structure in primates. Science 176:863–874.
Erdal, David, and Andrew Whiten. 1994. On human egalitarianism: an evolutionary product of Machiavellian status escalation? Current Anthropology 35:175–183. [AW/DE]
———. 1996. Egalitarianism and Machiavellian intelligence in human evolution. In Modelling the early human mind. P. Mellars and K. Gibson, eds.
Pp. 139–160. Cambridge: McDonald Institute Monographs. [AW/DE]
Fedderson, Timothy, and Alvaro Sandroni. 2006. A theory of participation in
elections. American Economic Review 96(4):1271–1282.
Fifer, F. C. 1987. The adoption of bipedalism by the hominids: a new hypothesis. Human Evolution 2:135–147.
Fisher, Ronald A. 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Flack, J. C. 2012a. A future for social evolution. Cliodynamics: The Journal of
Theoretical and Mathematical History 3:172–190. [JCF]

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

———. 2012b. Multiple time-scales and the developmental dynamics of
social systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 367:1802–1810. [JCF]
———. 2014. Life’s information hierarchy. Santa Fe Institute Bulletin 28:13–
24. [JCF]
Flack, J. C., and F. B. M. de Waal. 2007. Context modulates signal meaning in
primate communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA 104:1581–1586. [JCF]
Flack, J. C., D. Erwin, T. Elliot, and D. C. Krakauer. 2013. Timescales,
symmetry, and uncertainty reduction in the origins of hierarchy in biological systems. In Evolution cooperation and complexity. K. Sterelny,
Richard Joyce, Brett Calcott, and Ben Fraser, eds. Pp. 45–74. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. [JCF]
Flack, J. C., M. Girvan, F. B. M. de Waal, and D. C. Krakauer. 2006. Policing
stabilizes construction of social niches in primates. Nature 439:426–429,
doi:10.1038/nature04326. [JCF]
Flack, J. C., and D. C. Krakauer. 2011. Challenges for complexity measures: a
perspective from social dynamics and collective social computation. Chaos
21(37108):1–9. [JCF]
Flack, J. C., D. C. Krakauer, and F. B. M. de Waal. 2005. Robustness
mechanisms in primate societies: a perturbation study. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B 272:1091–1099. [JCF]
Flannery, Kent, and Joyce Marcus. 2012. The creation of inequality: how our
prehistoric ancestors set the stage for monarchy, slavery, and empire.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Foley, Robert A. 1996. An evolutionary and chronological framework for
human social behavior. Proceedings of the British Academy 88:95–117.
Frank, S. A. 2003. Repression of competition and the evolution of cooperation. Evolution 57:693–705. [JCF]
Fried, Morton H. 1967. The evolution of political society: an essay in political
anthropology. New York: Random House.
Furuichi, T. 1987. Sexual swelling, receptivity, and grouping of wild pygmy
chimpanzee females at Wamba, Zaire. Primates 28:309–318.
———. 1989. Social interactions and the life history of female (Pan paniscus) at Wamba, Republic of Zaire. International Journal of Primatology
10:173–198.
———. 1997. Agonistic interactions and matrifocal dominance rank of wild
bonobos (Pan paniscus) at Wamba. International Journal of Primatology
18:855–875.
Geertz, Clifford. 1962. The growth of culture and the evolution of mind.
Glencoe, IL: Free.
Gibbons, Ann. 2007. Spear-wielding chimps seen hunting bush babies. Science, February.
———. 2014. How we tamed ourselves–and became modern. Science, October.
Gies, Frances. 1984. The knight in history. New York: Harper.
Gilbert, Margaret. 1987. Modeling collective belief. Synthese 73:185–204.
Gintis, Herbert. 2000. Strong reciprocity and human sociality. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 206:169–179.
———. 2003a. The hitchhiker’s guide to altruism: genes, culture, and the
internalization of norms. Journal of Theoretical Biology 220(4):407–418.
———. 2003b. Solving the puzzle of human prosociality. Rationality and
Society 15(2):155–187.
———. 2009. The bounds of reason: game theory and the uniﬁcation of the
behavioral sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gintis, Herbert, Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, and Ernst Fehr. 2005. Moral
sentiments and material interests: on the foundations of cooperation in
economic life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gintis, Herbert, and Dirk Helbing. Forthcoming. Homo socialis: an analytical core for sociological theory. Review of Behavioral Economics.
Giugni, Marco G., Doug McAdam, and Charles Tilly. 1998. From contention
to democracy. London: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Goodall, Jane. 1964. Tool-using and aimed throwing in a community of freeliving chimpanzees. Nature 201:1264–1266.
———. 1986. The chimpanzees of Gombe: patterns of behavior. Cambridge,
MA: Belkap.
Gowlett, John A. J., and Richard W. Wrangham. 2013. Earliest ﬁre in Africa:
towards the convergence of archaeological evidence and the cooking hypothesis. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 48(1):5–30.
Güth, Werner, R. Schmittberger, and B. Schwarze. 1982. An experimental
analysis of ultimatum bargaining. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3:367–388.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

Haidt, Jonathan. 2012. The righteous mind: why good people are divided by
politics and religion. New York: Pantheon.
Hall, K. R. L. 1965. Behaviour and ecology of the wild Patas monkey,
Erythrocebus patas, in Uganda. Journal of Zoology 148(1):15–87.
Hare, B., A. P. Melis, V. Woods, S. Hastings, and Richard Wrangham. 2007.
Tolerance allows bonobos to outperform chimpanzees on a cooperative
task. Current Biology 17:619–623.
Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr,
and Herbert Gintis. 2004. Foundations of human sociality: economic experiments and ethnographic evidence from ﬁfteen small-scale societies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2005. ‘Economic man’ in cross-cultural perspective: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28
(6):795–815.
Henrich, Joseph, and Francisco Gil-White. 2001. The evolution of prestige:
freely conferred status as a mechanism for enhancing the beneﬁts of
cultural transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22:165–196.
Hill, Kim R., R. S. Walker, M. Bozicevic, J. Eder, T. Headland, B. Hewlett,
A. M. Hurtado, Frank Marlowe, Polly Wiessner, and B. Wood. 2011. Coresidence patterns in hunter-gatherer societies show unique human social
structure. Science 331:1286–1289.
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer. 1999. Mother Nature: a history of mothers, infants, and
natural selection. New York: Pantheon.
———. 2000. Mother Nature: maternal instincts and how they shape the
human species. New York: Ballantine.
———. 2009. Mothers and others: the evolutionary origins of mutual understanding. New York: Belknap.
———. 2010. Estimating the prevalence of shared care and cooperative
breeding in the order primates. www.citrona.com/hrdy.html (accessed
June 23, 2010).
Huffman, M. A., and M. A. Kalunde. 1993. Tool-assisted predation on a
squirrel by a female chimpanzee in the Mahale Mountains, Tanzania.
Primates 34:93–98.
Humphrey, Nicholas. 1976. The social function of intellect. In Growing
points in ethology. P. P. G. Bateson and R. A. Hinde, eds. Pp. 303–317.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Isaac, Barbara. 1987. Throwing and human evolution. African Archaeological
Review 5:3–17.
Isaac, Glynn. 1977. Food sharing and human evolution: archaeological evidence from the Plio-Pleistocene of East Africa. Journal of Anthropological
Research 34(3):311–325.
———. 1978. The food-sharing behavior of protohuman hominids. Scientiﬁc American 238:90–108.
Jaeggi, A. V., J. M. G. Stevens, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2010. Tolerant food
sharing and reciprocity is precluded by despotism among bonobos but not
chimpanzees. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 143:41–51.
Jolly, Alison. 1972. The evolution of primate behavior. New York: MacMillan.
Kaplan, Hillard, and Kim Hill. 1985a. Food sharing among Ache foragers:
tests of explanatory hypotheses. Current Anthropology 26(2):223–246.
———. 1985b. Hunting ability and reproductive success among male Ache
foragers: preliminary results. Current Anthropology 26(1):131–133.
Kaplan, Hillard, Kim Hill, Jane Lancaster, and Ana Magdalena Hurtado.
2000. A theory of human life history evolution: diet, intelligence, and
longevity. Evolutionary Anthropology 9:156–185.
Kaplan, Hillard S., S. W. Gangestad, Michael Gurven, J. Lancaster, T.
Mueller, and Arthur Robson. 2007. The evolution of diet, brain and life
history among primates and humans. In Guts and brains: an integrative
approach to the hominin record. W. Roebroeks, ed. Pp. 47–81. Leiden:
Leiden University Press.
Keeley, Lawrence H. 1996. War before civilization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Keeley, Lawrence H., and Nicholas Toth. 1981. Microwear polishes on early
stone tools from Koobi Fora, Kenya. Nature 293:464–465.
Kelly, Raymond C. 2000. Warless societies and the origin of war. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
———. 2005. The evolution of lethal intergroup violence. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA 102:15294–15298.
Kelly, Robert L. 1995. The foraging spectrum: diversity in hunter-gatherer
lifeways. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
King, Andrew J., Caitlin Douglas, Elise Huchard, Nick Isaac, and Guy
Cowlishaw. 2008. Dominance and afﬁliation mediate despotism in a social
primate. Current Biology 18:1833–1838.

351
King, Andrew J., Dominic D. P. Johnson, and Mark Van Vugt. 2009. The
origins and evolution of leadership. Current Biology 19(19):R911–R916.
Klein, Richard G. 1999. The human career: human biological and cultural
origins. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Knauft, Bruce. 1991. Violence and sociality in human evolution. Current
Anthropology 32(4):391–428.
Krakauer, D. C., and J. C. Flack. 2010. Better living through physics. Nature
467:661. [JCF]
Krauss, Jens, David Lusseau, and Richard James. 2009. Animal social networks: an introduction. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 63(7):967–
973.
Lambert, Patricia. 1997. Patterns of violence in prehistoric hunter-gatherer
societies of coastal Southern California. In Troubled times: violence and
warfare in the past. Debra L. Martin and David W. Frayer, eds. pp. 77–109.
Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach.
Langergraber, Kevin E. 2012. Generation times in wild chimpanzees and
gorillas suggest earlier divergence times in Great Ape and human evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 109
(39):15716–15721.
Leakey, Mary. 1971. Olduvai Gorge, excavations in Beds I and III, 1960–1963,
vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, Richard Borshay. 1979. The !Kung San: men, women and work in a
foraging society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, Richard Borshay, and Irven DeVore. 1968. Man the hunter. Piscataway,
NJ: Transaction.
LeVine, Robert A., and Donald T. Campbell. 1972. Ethnocentrism: theories of
conﬂict, ethnic attitudes, and group behavior. New York: Wiley.
Lewis, R. 2002. Beyond dominance: the importance of leverage. Quarterly
Review of Biology 77:149–164. [BC]
Lombard, M., and L. Phillipson. 2010. Indications of bow and stone-tipped
arrow use 64,000 years ago in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Antiquity
84:1–14.
Lorenz, Konrad. 1963. On aggression. New York: Harcourt.
Lumsden, Charles J., and Edward O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, mind, and culture:
the coevolutionary process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lupo, Karen D., and James F. O’Connell. 2002. Cut and tooth mark distributions on large animal bones: ethnoarchaeological data from the Hadza
and their implications for current ideas about early human carnivory.
Journal of Archaeological Science 29:85–109.
Macdonald, D. W., and C. Sillero-Zubiri. 2004. Biology and conservation of
wild canids. New York: Oxford University Press.
Maestripieri, Dario. 2007. Machiavellian intelligence: how Rhesus macaques
and humans have conquered the world. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Majolo, B., J. Lehmann, A. Bortoli de Vizioli, and G. Schino. 2012. Fitnessrelated beneﬁts of dominance in primates. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 147:652–660.
Martinez, I., J. L. Arsuaga, R. Quam, J. M. Carretero, A. Gracia, and L.
Rodriguez. 2008. Human hyoid bones from the Middle Pleistocene site of
the Sima de los Huesos (Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain). Journal of Human
Evolution 54(1):118–124.
Martinez, I., M. Rosa, J.-L. Arsuaga, P. Jarabo, R. Quam, C. Lorenzo, A.
Gracia, J.-M Carretero, J.-M. Bermu de Castro, and E. Carbonell. 2004.
Auditory capacities in Middle Pleistocene humans from the Sierra de
Atapuerca in Spain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 101:9976–9981.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
McGrew, William Clement. 1992. Chimpanzee material culture: implications
for human evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2004. The cultured chimpanzee: reﬂections on cultural primatology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McPherron, Shannon P., Zeresenay Alemseged, Curtis W. Marean, Jonathan
G. Wynn, Denné Reed, Denis Geraads, René Bobe, and Hamdallah A.
Béarat. 2010. Evidence for stone-tool assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature 466(7308):
857–860.
Mead, Margaret. 1963. Sex and temperament in three primitive societies. New
York: Morrow.
Medina, Martin. 2007. The world’s scavengers. Lanham, MD: AltaMira.
Milgram, S. 1974. Obedience to authority: an experimental view. New York:
Harper & Row.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

352

Current Anthropology

Miller, Geoffrey. 2001. The mating mind: how sexual choice shaped the
evolution of human nature. New York: Anchor.
Milton, K. 1984. Habitat, diet, and activity patterns of free-ranging woolly
spider monkeys. International Journal of Primatology 5(5):491–514.
Morris, Desmond. 1999 (1967). The naked ape: a zoologist’s study of the
human animal. New York: Delta.
Navarrete, Ana, Carel P. van Schaik, and Karin Isler. 2011. Energetics and
the evolution of human brain size. Nature 480:91–93.
Nesse, R. M. 2007. Runaway social selection for displays of partner value and
altruism. Biological Theory 2(2):145–155. [PS]
Nishida, Toshisada. 1973. The ant-gathering behavior by the use of tools
among wild chimpanzees of the Mahali Mountains. Journal of Human
Evolution 2:357–370.
Nishida, T., and K Hosaka. 1996. Coalition strategies among adult male
chimpanzees of the Mahale Mountains, Tanzania. In Great Ape societies.
W. C. McGrew, L. F. Marchant, and T. Nishida, eds. Pp. 114–134. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nowak, M., and K. Sigmund. 2005. Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature
Reviews 437(27):1291–1298. [PS]
Nowak, M., C. E. Tarnita, and E. O. Wilson. 2010. The evolution of
eusociality. Nature 466:1057–1062. [JCF]
O’Connell, James F., Kristen Hawkes, Karen D. Lupo, and Nicholas BlurtonJones. 2002. Male strategies and Plio-Pleistocene archaeology. Journal of
Human Evolution 43(6):831–872.
Odling-Smee, F. J., K. N. Laland, and M. W. Feldman. 2003. Niche construction: the neglected process in evolution (MPB-37). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. [JCF]
Okada, Daijiro, and Paul M. Bingham. 2008. Human uniqueness self-interest
and social cooperation. Journal of Theoretical Biology 254(2):261–270.
Okasha, Samir, and Ken Binmore. 2012. Evolution and rationality: decisions,
cooperation, and strategic behavior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The logic of collective action: public goods and the
theory of groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
O’Neil, Dennis. 2012. Analysis of early hominins. http://anthro.palomar.edu
/hominid/australo_2.htm.
Oosterbeek, Hessel, Randolph Sloop, and Gus van de Kuilen. 2004. Cultural differences in ultimatum game experiments: evidence from a metaanalysis. Experimental Economics 7:171–188.
Otterbein, Keith F. 2004. How war began. College Station: Texas A&M
University Press.
Page, R. E., and G. V. Amdam. 2007. The making of a social insect: developmental architectures of social design. BioEssays 29:334–343. [JCF]
Pagel, Mark. 2012. Wired for culture: origins of the human social mind. New
York: Norton.
Pandit, Sagar, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2003. A model for leveling coalitions
among primate males: toward a theory of egalitarianism. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 55:161–168.
Parsons, Talcott. 1937. The structure of social action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
———.1967. Sociological theory and modern society. New York: Free Press.
Paul, A., S. Preuschoft, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2000. The other side of the
coin: infanticide and the evolution of afﬁliative male-infant interactions in
Old World primates. In Infanticide by males and its implications. Carel P.
van Schaik and C. H. Janson, eds. Pp. 269–292. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pinker, Steven. 2010. The cognitive niche: coevolution of intelligence, sociality and language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 107(2):8993–8999.
Plooij, F. X. 1978. Tool-using during chimpanzees’ bushpig hunt. Carnivore
1:103–106.
Plourde, Aimée. 2010. Human power and prestige systems. In Mind the gap:
tracing the origins of human universals. Peter M. Kappeler and Joan B.
Silk, eds. pp. 139–152. Berlin: Springer.
Potts, Richard. 1996. Humanity’s descent: the consequences of ecological instability. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
———. 1998. Environmental hypotheses of hominin evolution. Yearbook of
Physical Anthropology 41:93–138.
Price, Michael E., and Mark Van Vugt. 2014. The evolution of leaderfollower reciprocity: the theory of service-for-prestige. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 8:363, doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00363.
Pruetz, Jill D., and Paco Bertolani. 2007. Savanna chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) hunt with tools. Current Biology 17:412–417.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2004. Not by genes alone. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Volume 56, Number 3, June 2015

Richerson, Peter J., Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger. 2001. Was agriculture impossible during the Pleistocene but Mandatory during the
Holocene? A climate change hypothesis. American Antiquity 66:387–411.
Riker, William H., and Peter C. Ordeshook. 1968. A theory of the calculus of
voting. American Political Science Review 62(1):25–42.
Roach, Neil T., Madhusudhan Venkadesan, Michael J. Rainbow, and Daniel
E. Lieberman. 2013. Elastic energy storage in the shoulder and the evolution of high-speed throwing in Homo. Nature 498:483–486.
Roebroeks, W., and P. Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
108:5209–5214.
Roth, Alvin E., Vesna Prasnikar, Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara, and Shmuel
Zamir. 1991. Bargaining and market behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana,
Pittsburgh, and Tokyo: an experimental study. American Economic Review
81(5):1068–1095.
Sahle, Yonatan, W. Karl Hutchings, David R. Braun, Judith C. Sealy, Leah E.
Morgan, Agazi Negash, and Balemwal Atnafu. 2013. Earliest stone-tipped
projectiles from the Ethiopian Rift date to more than 279,000 years ago.
PLoS ONE 8(11):1–9.
Sapolsky, R. M., and L. J. Share. 2004. A paciﬁc culture among wild baboons: its emergence and transmission. PLoS Biology 2(4):e106, doi:10.3171
/journal.pbio.0020106. [JDP]
Schuppli, Caroline, Karin Isler, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2012. How to explain the unusually late age at skill competence among humans. Journal of
Human Evolution 63:843–850.
Service, E. R. 1975. Origin of the state and civilization: the process of cultural
evolution. New York: Norton.
Shea, John J. 2006. The origins of lithic projectile point technology: evidence
from Africa, the Levant, and Europe. Journal of Archaeological Science
33:823–846.
Shultz, Susanne, Christopher Opie, and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2011. Stepwise
evolution of stable sociality in primates. Nature 479:219–222.
Silk, Joan B. 2011. The path to sociality. Nature 49:182–183.
Smith, D. W., and G. Ferguson. 2012. Decade of the wolf (revised and updated): returning the wild to Yellowstone. Guilford, CT: Lyons Press. [JDP]
Spikins, P. 2012. Goodwill hunting? debates over the “meaning” of lower
Palaeolithic handaxe form revisited. World Archaeology 44(3):378–392.
[PS]
Spikins, P. A. 2015. How compassion made us human. Barnsley, UK: Pen and
Sword. [PS]
Sterck, E. H. M., D. P. Watts, and Carel P. van Schaik. 1997. The evolution of
female social relationships in nonhuman primates. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 41:291–309.
Sterelny, Kim. 2012. Language, gesture, skill: the co-evolutionary foundations of language. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 367:2141–2151. [AW/DE]
Stevens, Jeroen M. G., Hilde Vervaecke, Han de Vries, and Linda van Elsacker.
2007. Sex differences in the steepness of dominance hierarchies in captive
bonobo groups. International Journal of Primatology 28(6):1417–1430.
Stiner, M. C. 2002. Carnivory, coevolution, and the geographic spread of the
genus Homo. Journal of Archeological Research 10:1–63.
Stiner, M. C., R. Barkai, and A. Gopher. 2009. Cooperative hunting and meat
sharing 400–200 kya at Qesem Cave, Israel. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA 106(32):13207–13212.
Strier, Karen B. 1987. Activity budgets of woolly spider monkeys, or
muriquis. American Journal of Primatology 13(4):385–395.
———. 1992. Causes and consequences of nonaggression in the woolly
spider monkey, or muriqui. In Aggression and peacefulness in humans and
other primates. J. Silverberg and J. P. Gray, eds. Pp. 100–116. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sugden, Robert. 2003. The logic of team reasoning. Philosophical Explorations 6(3):165–181.
Sugiyama, L. S., and R. Chacon. 2000. Effects of illness and injury on foraging among the Yora and Shiwiar: pathology risk as adaptive problem.
In Adaptation and human behavior: an anthropological perspective. L.
Cronk, N. Chagnon, and W. Irons, eds. Pp. 371–395. New York: Aldine de
Gruyter.
Sumpter, D. J. T. 2006. The principles of animal collective behavior. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 361:5–22.
[JCF]
Tacon, P., and C. Chippendale. 1994. Australia’s ancient warriors: changing
depictions of ﬁghting in the rock art of Arnhem Land, N.T. Cambridge
Archaeological Journal 4:211–248.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Gintis et al.

Zoon Politikon

Thieme, Harmut. 1997. Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany.
Nature 385(27):807–810.
Thorpe, I. J. N. 2003. Anthropology, archaeology, and the origin of warfare.
World Archaeology 35(1):145–165.
Tomasello, Michael. 2014. A natural history of human thinking. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, Michael, and Malinda Carpenter. 2007. Shared intentionality.
Developmental Science 10(1):121–125.
Tomasello, Michael, Malinda Carpenter, Josep Call, Tanya Behne, and
Henrike Moll. 2005. Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins of
cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28(5):675–691.
Tomasello, Michael, Alicia P. Melis, Claudio Tennie, Emily Wyman, and
Esther Herrmann. 2012. Two key steps in the evolution of human cooperation: the interdependence hypothesis. Current Anthropology 53:673–
676. [AW/DE]
Tooby, John, and Irven DeVore. 1987. The reconstruction of hominid evolution through strategic modeling. In The evolution of human behavior:
primate models. W. G. Kinzey, ed. Pp. 183–237. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
van Schaik, Carel P. 1983. Why are diurnal primates living in groups? Behaviour 87:120–144.
———. 1996. Social evolution in primates: the role of ecological factors and
male behavior. Proceedings of the British Academy 88:9–31.
van Schaik, Carel P., and J. M. Burkart. 2011. Social learning and evolution:
the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 366:1008–1016. [JCF]
van Schaik, Carel P., S. A. Pandit, and E. R. Vogel. 2006. Toward a general
model for male-male coalitions in primate groups. In Cooperation in
primates and humans: mechanisms and evolution. P. M. Kappeler and
Carel P. van Schaik, eds. pp. 151–171. Berlin: Springer.
van Schaik, Carel P., G. R. Pradhan, and M. A. van Noordwijk. 2004. Mating
conﬂict in primates: infanticide, sexual harassment and female sexuality.
In Sexual selection in primates. P. M. Kappeler and Carel P. van Schaik,
eds. Pp. 131–150. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Vugt, M. 2006. Evolutionary origins of leadership and followership.
Personality and Social Psychology Review 10:354–371. [BC]
Vigilant, Linda, Michael Hofreiter, Heike Siedel, and Christophe Boesch.
2001. Paternity and relatedness in wild chimpanzee communities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 98(23):12890–
12895.
von Rohr, C. R., S. E. Koski, J. M. Burkart, C. Caws, O. N. Fraser, A. Ziltener,
and Carel P. van Schaik. 2012. Impartial third-party interventions in
captive chimpanzees: a reﬂection of community concern. PLoS ONE 7(3):
e32494.
Vrba, Elisabeth S. 1995. The fossil record of African antelopes (Mammalia,
Bovidae) in relation to human evolution and paleoclimate. In Paleoclimate
and evolution with emphasis on human origin. Elisabeth S. Vrba, G. Denton, L. Burckle, and T. Partridge, eds. Pp. 385–424. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Wadley, L., T. Hodgskiss, and M. Grant. 2009. Implications for complex
cognition from the hafting of tools with compound adhesives in the
Middle Stone Age, South Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA 106(24):9590–9594.
Wallace, Anthony F. C. 1970. Culture and personality. New York: Random
House.

353
Watts, D., M. Muller, S. Amsler, G. Mbabazi, and John C. Mitani. 2006.
Lethal intergroup aggression by chimpanzees in the Kibale National Park,
Uganda. American Journal of Primatology 68:161–180.
Whallon, Robert. 1989. The human revolution. In The human revolution:
behavioural and biological perspectives on the origins of modern humans.
P. Mellars and C. Stringer, eds. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Whiten, Andrew, and David Erdal. 2012. The human socio-cognitive niche
and its evolutionary origins. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 367(1599):2119–2129.
Whittaker, John C., and Grant McCall. 2001. Handaxe-hurling hominids: an
unlikely story. Current Anthropology 42(4):566–572.
Wiessner, Polly. 1977. Xaro: a regional system of reciprocity for reducing risk
among the !Kung San. PhD dissertation, University of Michigan.
———. 2006. From spears to M16s: testing the imbalance of power hypothesis among the Enga. Journal of Anthropological Research 62:165–
191.
———. 2009. The power of one: the Big Man revisited. In The evolution of
leadership: transitions in decision making from small-scale to middle-range
societies. Kevin J. Vaugh, Jelmer W. Eerkins, and John Kantner, eds. pp. 195–
221. Santa Fe: Sar Press.
Wilkins, Adam S., Richard W. Wrangham, and W. Tecumseh Fitch. 2014.
The “domestication syndrome” in mammals: a uniﬁed explanation based
on neural crest cell behavior and genetics. Genetics 197(3):795–808.
Wilkins, J., B. J. Schoville, K. S. Brown, and M. Chazan. 2012. Evidence for
early hafted hunting technology. Science 338:942–946.
Willems, Erik P., Barbara Hellriegel, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2013. The
collective action problem in primate territory economics. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London B 280(1759):1–7.
Wilson, Edward O. 1975. Sociobiology: the new synthesis. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
———. 2012. The social conquest of Earth. New York: Norton.
Winterhalder, Bruce, and Eric Alden Smith. 1992. Evolutionary ecology and
human behavior. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Wood, Bernard. 2010. Reconstructing human evolution: achievements,
challenges, and opportunities. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA 107(suppl.):8902–8909.
Woodburn, James. 1982. Egalitarian societies. Man 17(3):431–451.
Wrangham, Richard W. 1980. An ecological model of female-bonded primate groups. Behaviour 75:262–300.
Wrangham, Richard W., and Rachel Carmody. 2010. Human adaptation to
the control of ﬁre. Evolutionary Anthropology 19:187–199.
Wrangham, Richard W., and Luke Glowacki. 2012. Intergroup aggression in
chimpanzees and war in nomadic hunter-gatherers: evaluating the chimpanzee model. Human Nature 23:5–29.
Wrangham, Richard W., and Dale Peterson. 1996. Demonic males: apes and
the origins of human violence. New York: Mariner Books.
Wrong, Dennis H. 1961. The oversocialized conception of man in modern
sociology. American Sociological Review 26:183–193.
Wynn, T. 2009. Hafted spears and the archaeology of mind. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 106(24):9544–9545.
Yamagishi, Toshio, N. Jin, and Toko Kiyonari. 1999. Bounded generalized
reciprocity: in-group boasting and in-group favoritism. Advances in Group
Processes 16:161–197.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:24:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

