Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

S191

Experimental Approaches to Archaeological
Fire Features and Their Behavioral Relevance
by Vera Aldeias
The uses and functions of ﬁre in early human adaptations are commonly debated and at times very controversial
topics. It is important to recognize under what circumstances and conditions speciﬁc ﬁre-related traces can be produced and preserved in the archaeological record. Currently, a growing body of data is emerging on the application of
experimental research to the study of archaeological hearths and their residues. In this review, I draw together aspects of
such available experimental data, particularly those pertaining to the sedimentary expression and components produced during simple campﬁres. I highlight not only what one can ﬁnd in ideal preservation conditions but also what
type of indirect alteration proxies can be expected to survive in the archaeological record. I then discuss the implications
of such data for analyzing anthropic ﬁre features, their timing, and their meaning in terms of behavioral complexity
in the use and manufacture of ﬁre during the Paleolithic.

1. Introduction
Fire is a key behavioral and technological adaptation in human
evolution, and today all modern societies routinely rely on ﬁre.
Early ﬁre use by the genus Homo may have been a crucial adaptation leading to behavioral traits, such as cooking, extending activity time by providing light, warmth, protection against
predators, and as a driving mechanism for technological innovations (Brown et al. 2009; Mazza et al. 2006). Fire use might
also have been an important catalyst for the evolution of biological and social traits (Gowlett 2006; Twomey 2013; Wrangham 2006, 2017). It is therefore not surprising that decades of
research have focused on the ﬁrst evidence for ﬁre in the archaeological record (James 1989). A related aspect, and one often less investigated, is when ﬁre actually started to be systematically incorporated in the adaptive tool kit of past humans.
This differs from research dealing with ﬁrst appearance of ﬁre
use and focuses on when humans became proﬁcient in making and repeatedly employing ﬁre in their activities. Roebroeks
and Villa (2011) suggest that early European hominins did
not “habitually” use ﬁre before 400 kya, whereas clear evidence
for pyrotechnology exists in later Neanderthal contexts. Conversely, other authors argue that although Neanderthals did
use ﬁre, this was not an essential part of their adaptation, and
European Neanderthals might not have been obligated ﬁre

Vera Aldeias is Researcher in the Department of Human Evolution at
the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology (Deutscher
Platz 6, 04107 Leipzig, Germany [vera_aldeias@eva.mpg.de]) and Researcher at the Interdisciplinary Center for Archaeology and Evolution of Human Behavior at the Universidade do Algarve (Campus da
Penha, 80085-139 Faro, Portugal). This paper was submitted 25 VII 16,
accepted 20 I 17, and electronically published 16 V 17.

users (Aldeias et al. 2012; Dibble et al. 2017; Sandgathe et al.
2011a, 2011b). The lack of consensus on both the timing of
the ﬁrst use of ﬁre and its recurrent incorporation into human adaptations largely stems from the inherent difﬁculty in
identifying intentionally used, maintained, and manufactured
hearths. There are several confounding aspects, such as natural
landscape ﬁres affecting archaeological occupations (Bellomo
1993; Buenger 2003; Gowlett 2017), geological processes producing materials that may be mistaken as combustion residues
(Stahlschmidt et al. 2015; Weiner et al. 1998), and issues relating to preservation of the original ﬁre components (Albert,
Bamford, and Cabanes 2006; Cabanes, Weiner, and ShahackGross 2011; Huisman et al. 2012; March 2013; Stiner et al.
1995). We also lack criteria that would allow us to distinguish
the maintenance and manufacture of ﬁre versus its harvesting
as a natural landscape resource.
The archaeological visibility of ﬁre residues greatly depends
on our ability to identify and interpret combustion remains as
pertaining to instances of intentional anthropic ﬁre use. It is,
therefore, of utmost importance to recognize under what circumstances and conditions speciﬁc ﬁre-related traces can be
produced and preserved in the archaeological record. One way
to obtain such data is through archaeological experimentation.
There is a growing body of data from experimental work
dealing with ﬁre features and artifactual thermal alteration.
In this paper I review some of the available experimental
data in the framework of Paleolithic contexts, focusing mainly
on sedimentary components and signatures and, to a lesser extent, on alterations of artifacts that result from association with
ﬁres. First I will focus on what the proxies for ﬁre are. Then I
will discuss experimental results for the types of fuel used, the
effects of hearth location on artifact alteration, and elements
indicating the intact or reworked nature of hearths (ﬁg. 1).

q 2017 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2017/58S16-0004$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/691210

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S192

Current Anthropology

Finally, based on the available data, I discuss the archaeological signiﬁcance of burned artifacts and inferences for hearth
functions. The overall goal is to present a comprehensive though
not exhaustive review of the application of experimental research for the understanding of combustion features.
1.1. Fire Proxies and Their Contextual Arrangement
Combustion residues can be broadly divided into direct (primary) and indirect (secondary) evidence. Direct ﬁre residues

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

are the by-products created by burning. The nature of these
by-products is intrinsically dependent on the type of fuel used
and consists mainly of calcitic ashes, charcoals, siliceous components (phytoliths and siliceous aggregates), calcined bone
fragments, or dung calcitic spherulites. A simple campﬁre can
create diagnostic sedimentary signatures expressed as a succession of discrete sedimentary lenses, typically with an uppermost ash-rich lens commonly resting on blackish (often
charcoal-rich) deposits in wood-fueled ﬁres. However, if these
somewhat fragile sediments are not protected or rapidly bur-

Figure 1. Schematic diagram illustrating the several phases of hearth construction, use, and preservation, with main factors inﬂuencing the archaeological expression of such evidence. The numbered circles refer to sections in this paper that deal with the available
data from experimental archaeology. A color version of this ﬁgure is available online.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

ied, they can then be easily displaced or chemically altered and
may become essentially invisible in the archaeological record.
Another type of evidence for past ﬁres relates to indirect
proxies. These are artifacts or sediments altered because of ﬁre
temperatures. Depending on the temperature threshold, such
heating can result in important structural and mineralogical
transformations (Aldeias et al. 2016a, 2016b; Chu et al. 2008;
Elbaum et al. 2003; Maki, Homburg, and Brosowske 2006;
Schmidt 2013; Schmidt et al. 2013; Stiner et al. 1995; Toffolo
and Boaretto 2014; Weiner et al. 2015). Therefore, thermally
altered artifacts (bones, lithics, shells, seeds, etc.) or deposits
(soils or sediment aggregates mixed with the original fuel, or
the heated substrate over which a ﬁre is built) are relevant indirect proxies for past ﬁres. Diagenesis and taphonomic processes can equally affect burned artifacts and deposits, leading to
their displacement and loss of primary position and contextual
association (ﬁg. 1). What is important, however, is that several
heat-related transformations are irreversible even at a geological
timescale. Therefore, diagnostic artifacts (e.g., burned lithics or
bones) can have a higher chance of surviving in the archaeological record when compared with the more “fragile” components such as wood ash.

2. The Evidence for Fuel
The type of fuels being burned can result in distinct sedimentary accumulations and are an essential variable for combustion parameters, such as the duration of the ﬁre, management
strategies, and associated average and maximum temperatures
(ﬁg. 1; table 1). Fuel characteristics can also be relevant indicators of paleoenvironmental aspects (e.g., the type of vegetation cover surrounding a site) as well as higher-level inferences about human behavior in terms of selection criteria,
gathering efforts and costs (Henry 2017; March 1992; ThéryParisot 2002a, 2002b; Théry-Parisot, Chabal, and Chrzavzez
2010), and efﬁciency in relation to desired hearth functions
(Henry and Théry-Parisot 2014; March 1992; March and
Wunsch 2003; Simpson et al. 2003; Théry-Parisot 2002a,
2002b; Théry-Parisot and Henry 2012; Villa, Bon, and Castel
2002). Substantial experimental work has been done in the
domain of paleobotany and to a lesser extent with the sedimentary expressions of fuel-related variables. Here I will focus
mainly on the latter.
2.1. Wood and Grasses as Fuel Source
Wood, and to a smaller extent grasses or sedges, are commonly
used as fuel sources because of their optimal pyrogenic properties. Their combustion by-products dominate the remains
found in ancient hearths. Thermal degradation of the organic
compounds starts at ~3007C in a chain reaction that is often
complex (Braadbaart and Poole 2008; Pereira, Úbeda, and
Martin 2012). The composition of plant combustion residues
depends on pyrogenic variables (e.g., temperature, ﬁre duration,
oxygen availability, environmental factors, etc.) and intrinsic

S193

properties of the plant matter that was used (e.g., physiological
condition, anatomic section, density, moisture content, size;
Berna and Goldberg 2008; Braadbaart and Poole 2008; Braadbaart et al. 2012; Brochier 1983; Etiegni and Campbell 1991;
March 1992; March et al. 2014; Théry-Parisot 2001; ThéryParisot, Chabal, and Chrzavzez 2010; Weiner 2010).
The by-products of combusted plant materials are mainly
charcoals and ash. Charcoals result from the carbonization and
incomplete charring of wood (Braadbaart and Poole 2008),
whereas wood ash comprises the residual inorganic fraction left
after organic material degradation. Ash is mainly composed
of micritic (!4 µm) calcium carbonate resulting from the alteration of cellular calcium oxalate crystals contained in plant
tissues (e.g., Brochier 1996; Canti 2003; Mentzer 2014; Pereira,
Úbeda, and Martin 2012). Other residual components are siliceous in nature, namely phytoliths and silica aggregates, as
well as inorganic minerals from soil material originally contained or attached to the used fuel source (Albert, Berna, and
Goldberg 2012; Canti 1998; Elbaum et al. 2003; Mentzer 2014;
Schiegl et al. 1994, 1996; Weiner 2010). This residual acid insoluble fraction was experimentally estimated to be on the
order of only 2% by volume or weight of wood ash (Schiegl et al.
1996). Moreover, the proportion of different constituents varies: phytoliths, for instance, occur in greater concentrations in
certain portions of a plant (e.g., leaves and bark) and in grasses
or sedges than in wooden species (Albert and Cabanes 2007;
Piperno et al. 1999; Tsartsidou et al. 2007; Weiner 2010).
In thin section, ash accumulations have very distinct sedimentary characteristics with a calcitic crystallitic groundmass,
and it is sometimes possible to isolate individual or articulated
pseudomorph crystals of calcium oxalate (Canti 2003; Mentzer
2014; Schiegl et al. 1996). While these pseudomorphs reﬂect
original crystal shapes in the plant tissues, experimental research trying to link charred morphologies to the speciﬁc fuel
types have been largely unsuccessful (Wattez 1996; Wattez
and Courty 1987). Experiments by Simpson et al. (2003) suggest that some distinction between willow and birch woods
could be attained by microscopically examining the crystallitic
b-fabric of ash pseudomorphs and its clustering in relation to
embedded charcoal fragments at combustions below 4007C.
Still, further research is needed to conﬁrm such observations.
Relatively few experiments have targeted the burning of
grasses or sedges. Miller and Sievers (2012) conducted a series
of ﬁres using these types of fuels. Their micromorphological
results show the stratigraphically intermixed production of
laminated ﬁbrous charcoals and abundant phytoliths, several
of which preserve a well-deﬁned anatomical articulation. It is
also noteworthy that by burning grasses and sedges, the overwhelming quantity of combustion by-products were phytoliths, with no observed calcitic ash rhombs (Miller and Sievers
2012). There is little experimental data on the sedimentary
manifestation of mixed-plant fuel sources, namely, the combined combustion of wood and grasses within hearths. An
interesting archaeological case study, followed by experimental research, is described by Meignen, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
900–1,000
995
920
892
855
818
466, 760
562, 730
1800

Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood
Wood (sicklebush)

Wood (sicklebush)

Sedge (Cyperus involucratus)
Grass (Themeda triandra and
Imporada cylindrica)
Grass (Setaria plicatilis)
73–122 minutes

NR

NR
4 days
1 day
4 days
1 day
1 day
1–3 hours
3 hours 45 minutes,
5 hours
4 hours 15 minutes,
5 hours
NR

Fire duration

Open ﬂat ﬁres (30 cm #
30 cm)
Slightly lowered, cleared
surface (60 cm diameter)
NR
NR
NR
NR

Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres
Open ﬂat ﬁres (ca. 40 cm
diameter)
Open ﬂat ﬁres (ca. 40 cm
diameter)
Flat horizontally laid sedges
Flat horizontally laid sedges

Fire shape/dimensions

Air-dried for 1 month
Air-dried for 1 month

Several (fresh and dry)

Not fully dry

Wheel-dried (12%–20%
moisture)
Wheel-dried (12%–20%
moisture)
Sun-dried

NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR

Fuel condition
(moisture/state)

2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

Théry-Parisot et al. 2005
Bellomo 1993
Braadbaart et al. 2012
Braadbaart et al. 2012
Shahack-Gross et al. 2005

Mentzer 2009

Miller and Sievers 2012

Miller and Sievers 2012
Bellomo 1993

Bentsen 2013

Stiner et al. 1995
Canti and Linford
Canti and Linford
Canti and Linford
Canti and Linford
Canti and Linford
Bellomo 1993
Bentsen 2013

Study

Note. It is not uncommon for only the maximum peak temperature to be reported, though such a peak can be very short lived. Increased research on the average amount of heat and its durability might be of
interest in many questions dealing with archaeological hearths. NR p not reported.

825–605
250

Bone (with some wood)
Tree stump
Peat
Cow dung
Cattle and sheep dung
800
800
630

800–900

225

600

Maximum mean

Bone (with some wood)

157

Maximum

Fuel type

Recorded temperature (7C)

Table 1. Fuel types and maximum temperatures recorded in experimental ﬁres

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

(2014). This study was conducted in order to clarify the provenience of millimeter-sized reddish rounded soil aggregates
embedded in ash layers at the site of Hayonim Cave. The authors observed similar clumps of terra rossa attached to the
roots of grasses growing in the soils around the site, and these
would turn to similar reddish colorations when exposed to
heat. Meignen, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef (2014) concluded that
bushes or small branches were used as additional fuel sources,
possibly attesting to expedient gathering practices near to the
site.
One important sedimentary expression of ﬁres is the calculation of the expected volume of ash and charcoal produced
by combustion events. Ash yield seems to be a function of two
main variables: the completeness of the combustion (which
can be more efﬁciently achieved by using dry wood sources
and higher temperatures) and the relative amount of insoluble
fraction per weight of the original fuel material. This was inferred from several experimental studies. For instance, Schiegl
et al. (1996) found that, although normally used in smaller
quantities, the burning of bark, cones, and leaves actually
produces substantially more ash than the combustion of wood
because of their higher content of siliceous aggregates and
phytoliths. Ash yield can also vary according to fuel condition,
namely, if the fuel source was fresh or naturally dried wood.
A twofold increase in ash production was obtained experimentally using naturally dried fuels as compared with green
wood (Albert and Cabanes 2007), and this difference is mainly
due to the increased water content in green wood. Minor differences in relative ash weight and volume were also reported
in the case of different wood species (Schiegl et al. 1996). In
limited oxygen conditions and with decreased heating (e.g.,
with temperatures 13007C, restricted ventilation, or with abrupt
interruption of burning phase due to rain), the combustion of
organic compounds ends. This results in an increase in solid
carbonaceous residues in the form of charcoal in relation to the
ash content (e.g., Braadbaart and Poole 2008; March 1992;
March et al. 2014). However, as emphasized by Théry-Parisot,
Chabal, and Chrzavzez (2010), experimental results on the
amount of charcoal produced and its underlying parameters
varies greatly between different studies, making it difﬁcult to
correlate the expected amount of charcoal to more speciﬁc
combustion factors or wood selection criteria before burning.
In actualistic ﬁre experiments, the resulting ash layer tends
to be fairly thin, with reported maximum thickness rarely above
2 cm (e.g., Bentsen 2012; Mallol et al. 2013a, 2013b; March
et al. 2014). Such experimental hearths typically reﬂect shortduration events, with the combustion lasting for a couple of
hours and only rarely for durations of more than one day. It
is indeed difﬁcult to test experimentally the effects of hearths
that are continuously used over the course of several months—
though ethnographic evidence shows that these can produce
ash layers more than 20 cm thick (Mallol et al. 2007). In their experiments burning grasses and sedges, Miller and Sievers (2012)
observed a dramatic decrease in the volume of the burned ma-

S195

terial with a loss of up to 98% of the original thickness of fuel
during combustion.
These values can give some idea of the minimum quantity
of material present in an archaeological site. However, while
experimental data tends to show some degree of correlation
between amount of fuel and thickness of the ﬁnal ash layer
(March 1992; March et al. 2014), processes such as compression, fragmentation, and postdepositional dissolution can affect calculations of ash thickness and original fuel yield without
a clear control for site-speciﬁc diagenetic rates in the archaeological record.
2.2. Bone as Fuel Source
Bone can be another fuel resource. Evidence for bone-fueled
hearths has been proposed for several Paleolithic sites, mainly
in the Upper Paleolithic (Beresford-Jones et al. 2010; Marquer
et al. 2010; Schiegl et al. 2003; Théry-Parisot 2002a) and in
Middle Paleolithic or Middle Stone Age contexts (Gabucio et al.
2014; see also Cain 2005; Dibble et al. 2009; Morin 2010; Yravedra and Uzquiano 2013).
Because of their relatively high critical heat ﬂux for ignition
(around 3807C; Laloy 1981), it seems that bones cannot be used
as the sole fuel to start a ﬁre (Théry-Parisot and Costamagno
2005). In experimental studies, a mixture of wood and bone is
commonly used, particularly during the initial stages of combustion. The assessment of use of bone as fuel is based on a set
of criteria, namely, the high percentage of calcined bone pieces,
a higher proportion of bone to charcoal ratio, and intense fragmentation indexes with an abundance of bones in size ranges
smaller than 2 cm (Costamagno et al. 2005; Joly and March
2003; Marquer et al. 2010; Mentzer 2009). The size distribution
of burned fragments seems to be more a function of intensity of
combustion as proposed by Stiner et al. (1995) than minor variations due to initial bone size (Costamagno et al. 2005; Mentzer
2009).
Experimental research shows differences in pyrotechnology
of bone ﬁres when compared with simple wood-fueled ﬁres,
and it has been proposed that the use of bone fuels can provide certain advantages. Controlled experiments demonstrate
that the use of fresh, spongy bones will signiﬁcantly increase
the duration of a combustion event (Costamagno et al. 2005;
Mentzer 2009; Théry-Parisot and Costamagno 2005; ThéryParisot et al. 2005), with a direct positive relationship between
the amount of bone used and the longevity of ﬂames in a ﬁre
(Théry-Parisot 2002a). This increased efﬁciency is due to the
ﬂammability of fatty components, indicating that complete
fresh bones rich in grease content (i.e., spongy bone sections)
are substantially more effective combustibles than wood (ThéryParisot 2002a; Théry-Parisot and Costamagno 2005). As can be
seen in table 1, there is not a substantial difference in maximum
temperatures achieved with bone instead of wood fuels in experimental ﬁres, with high temperatures of 8007–9007C reached
in bone ﬁres as in wood (see also Joly and March 2003).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S196

Current Anthropology

Conversely, fragmented, dry, and compact bones exhibit
quite different pyrogenic properties when they are used as the
main fuel source. Although such pieces can more easily be
ignited because of their minor water content, experimentation
indicates that these are quickly consumed, and ﬁres fueled with
fragmented dry bones tend to be of shorter duration and with
lower average temperature than those using complete fresh
bones (Mentzer 2009; Théry-Parisot and Costamagno 2005).
Similarly, Théry-Parisot and Costamagno (2005) demonstrate
that the use of compact bones, which are poor in fat content,
will not produce combustion durations distinct from those
observed in purely wood-fueled ﬁres.
These important though subtle differences in the condition
and type of bones used before burning seem to indicate that
the advantages of bone fuels are not straightforward. If we
could demonstrate their exploitation by past humans, this
would in turn indicate an important degree of knowledge about
bone pyrogenic properties. Unfortunately, however, combined
effects of combustion and taphonomy can confound the visibility of such differences in the archaeological record (e.g., Cain
2005; Joly and March 2003). Original size selection of complete
fresh bones might not be detectable after burning. Furthermore, as pointed out by Costamagno et al. (2005), subsequent
reuse of the same hearth will entail further fragmentation and
calcination of bones from previous events, creating increased
confounding evidence. Experiments dealing with heat-induced
changes in bone cremation practices have also revealed that it
is challenging to infer bone condition (ﬂeshed, green, or dry
bones) before burning (Gonçalves et al. 2011). Finally, preservation is an equally important aspect for assessing original bone type selection. Stiner et al. (1995) used agitation and
trampling experiments to demonstrate that burned bones are
more likely to be reduced to powder by both compaction and
trampling when compared with mildly heated or unburned
fragments. Calcined bones are the most susceptible to such
taphonomic damage (Nicholson 1992), and their macroscopic
visibility in the archaeological record might, therefore, be considerably biased.
2.3. Animal Dung, Peat, and Turf as Fuel Sources
The use of other fossil (e.g., coal), animal (herbivore dung),
and organo-mineral-based (e.g., peat and turf) fuel sources are
known mainly for later prehistoric and historic archaeological
periods. Only rarely have instances of such fuel sources been
proposed for Paleolithic sites (e.g., Théry et al. 1996), and here
I only brieﬂy discuss experimental data comparing these types
of fuel sources with wood.
Livestock dung fuels have been investigated in terms of their
archaeological evidence and experimentally described (e.g.,
Braadbaart et al. 2012; Canti 2003; Gur-Arieh et al. 2014; Matthews 2010; Shahack-Gross 2011; Shahack-Gross and Finkelstein 2008). The burning of dung produces microscopic sedimentary components that can be readily identiﬁed by the
presence of calcitic dung spherulites, burned organic plant tis-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

sues (which can include ash pseudomorphs), and residual inorganic components (Brochier 1983; Matthews 2010; ShahackGross 2011). Gur-Arieh et al. (2013) used a ratio of wood ash
pseudomorphs to dung spherulites to characterize the predominant use of dung versus wood fuels. Experiments by
Simpson et al. (2003) show the differences between the calcitic
nature of wood ashes, the organic-rich isotropic composition of
dung materials containing calcitic spherulites (in sheep dung),
and the rubeﬁed (reddened) material with phytoliths and diatoms obtained from burning peat and turf. Braadbaart et al.
(2012) note that peat and cow dung, in particular, result in a
higher release of smoke than wood ﬁres.

3. Hearth Location and Its Effect on Artifact
Alteration
Thus far we have focused the discussion on ﬁres and their
direct combustion residues. However, because of preservation
of these fragile residues, it is common to rely on the concentration and dispersion of noncombustible artifacts to infer the
presence of ﬁre. In fact, archaeological interpretations of past
ﬁres are often solely based on indirect evidence for ﬁre, that
is, the thermally altered artifacts found in a site. It is, therefore, important to reconstruct when and how ﬁres affect surrounding artifacts and deposits.
Archaeological visibility of past ﬁre use is inﬂuenced by
hearth location (ﬁg. 2), namely, if hearths were built in an occupational site or outside it. The latter will entail little or no
archaeological visibility, particularly in the case of simple, nonstructured combustion structures such as those commonly associated with Paleolithic contexts.
Several variables relate to the behavioral choice of hearth
location within a site, and these in turn affect the type of evidence produced. For instance, we should take into account the
preservation bias toward ﬁres built inside the drip line of caves
versus ﬁres built outside, the latter being substantially more
exposed to taphonomical processes and increased archaeological “invisibility.” The selection of location is also particularly pertinent for its association with notions of occupation
duration and spatial organization of the habitat. Emergent
organizational patterns in a given archaeological site—namely
activities developed around a ﬁre—can be relevant for reconstructing space management and activity areas. In this sense,
evidence for stacked hearths (i.e., distinct and vertically superimposed combustion events) has been proposed for several
Paleolithic sites, including early ﬁre evidence at Qesem Cave
around 400 kya (Barkai et al. 2017; Karkanas et al. 2007;
Shahack-Gross et al. 2014) and in later contexts (e.g., Aldeias
et al. 2012; Courty et al. 2012; Goldberg et al. 2012; Meignen,
Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 2007; Schiegl et al. 1996). Experimental work on the superimposition of ﬁre events by Mallol
et al. (2013b) has noted the difﬁculty in discerning relighting
events over short-term intervals even at a microscale of analysis.
Similarly, on the basis of macroscopic observations, Bentsen
(2012) reports on multiple superimposed ﬁres not resulting in

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

S197

Figure 2. From the behavioral choice of hearth location to the summarized effects in terms of archaeological visibility. A color
version of this ﬁgure is available online.

larger hearth areas when compared with single combustion
events. Such experiments suggest that discernible stacked combustion features will be identiﬁed only in situations of either an
intentional deposition of material between distinct combustion
events or those related to a substantial amount of time elapsed
between each ﬁre event (Aldeias et al. 2012; Mallol et al. 2013b).
3.1. Lateral Proximity to Hearths
The degree to which a surface ﬁre affects the surrounding
sediments and artifacts depends mainly on two variables: temperatures reached during combustion and, most importantly,
the distance to the ﬁre feature itself. Temperatures within the
limits of a ﬁre rise substantially during initial combustion with
all types of fuels (see table 1), with a rapid spike in temperatures observed within the ﬁrst few minutes of ignition. Our
experiments (Aldeias et al. 2016a) show that temperatures drop
dramatically outside the ﬁreplace limits, and this is true for both
the surface immediately adjacent to it and laterally buried
deposits. Other experimental work has shown that, as expected,
substantial thermal alteration is visible in artifacts directly
added into an active ﬁre, while those positioned immediately
outside the ﬁre’s limits remain largely unaffected (Mallol et al.
2013a, 2013b; Sergant, Crombé, and Perdaen 2006; Wadley
2009). Only small-sized artifacts, namely pot lids, were dispersed farther away, being ejected distances of up to 3 m (Mallol
et al. 2013b; Sergant, Crombé, and Perdaen 2006).
These results suggest that the distribution of burned remains are a function of ﬁre area and can mimic the limits and
extension of hearths. Therefore, dissociation between burned
artifacts and direct evidence for a hearth in any archaeological context may point to a certain degree of artifact movement
and reworking. Causes of such dispersion can be either taph-

onomic displacements (e.g., bioturbation) or behavioral management of combustion residues (e.g., heat treatment of lithics
or cleaning of previous residues), as will be further discussed
below.
3.2. Vertical Proximity to Hearths
A somewhat more complex issue is to reconstruct how deeply
a ﬁre affects underlying substrate and embedded artifacts.
Reports on maximum subsurface temperatures beneath a ﬁre
vary greatly because of uncontrolled variables and different
experimental conditions (Bennett 1999; Campbell et al. 1995;
March et al. 2014; Sievers and Wadley 2008; Wadley 2009;
Werts and Jahren 2007). In our recent experimentation (Aldeias et al. 2016a), we used a set of controlled parameters to
investigate subsurface heat transfer under a wide range of
conditions and variables that have archaeological applicability.
This experimental work shows that while maximum temperatures and rate of heat transfer depends on a range of factors
(substrate type, moisture content, porosity, ﬁre temperature,
ﬁre duration, etc.), signiﬁcant thermal alteration is expected
only directly underneath a ﬁre and not to its sides. The diameter of this alteration is a direct function of hearth size; that
is, larger ﬁres will effectively alter equally larger subsurface
deposits than smaller, restricted features. This study suggests
that under a variety of experimental conditions, temperatures
around 4007C and as high as 8007C can be reached at shallow
depths (2 cm below the surface) and that at 10 cm below a ﬁre,
maximum temperatures may range from 857C to 2507C (Aldeias et al. 2016a). Subsurface temperatures continue to increase well after a ﬁre is extinct, and it is expected that longer
ﬁre durations will further increase subsurface exposure to heat.
These results are generally in accordance with previous studies

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S198

Current Anthropology

reporting on subsurface temperatures (Bennett 1999; Bentsen
2013; Campbell et al. 1995; March et al. 2014; Sievers and
Wadley 2008; Wadley 2009; Werts and Jahren 2007). Although
temperatures consistently decrease with depth independently
of substrate material (Aldeias et al. 2016a; Canti and Linford
2000; March et al. 2014), it is interesting that Bellomo (1993)
observed that burning of tree stumps might show increased
subsurface temperatures linked to the smoldering root system.
In general, experimentally obtained subsurface temperatures
suggest that artifact alteration can occur postdepositionally.
An important variable is the duration of the ﬁre event. For
instance, while in the experimental study by Stiner et al. (1995)
calcination levels were never achieved in buried bones, similar
experiments carried out by Bennett (1999) showed that longer
(48-hour ﬁre durations) did in fact produce black bone alteration at 10 cm of depth and calcined bones at shallower depths.
Bennet (1999) further hypothesized that some differentiations
might be made in terms of surface alteration of bones indirectly exposed to heat (buried bones) as compared with those
directly exposed to ﬁre, with the former exhibiting more uniform surface color alterations associated with minimum fracturing and warping. Other studies have shown the effects of
ﬁre duration in the degree of artifact alterations. For instance,
Wadley (2009) notes that red ochre might be artiﬁcially over
represented in archaeological contexts as the result of thermal
modiﬁcation of yellow ochre and iron-rich rocks buried underneath a ﬁre. In her ﬁre experiments, no color alteration was
observed in a short-lived ﬁre event (lasting for 1.3 hours with
temperatures 12507C), whereas with longer ﬁre duration (temperatures 12507C for 19 hours) all of the buried materials became reddened, even those buried at 10 cm below the surface
(Wadley 2009). Given that temperatures commonly reach above
1007C at up to 10 cm in depth (Aldeias et al. 2016a), experimental research suggests that other artifacts—such as organic
materials like seeds, fruits, plant litter, grass, and rootlets—can
be postdepositionally altered. Similarly, experimental ﬁres by
Miller and Sievers (2012) resulted in the carbonization of a
layer of sedges buried below 5 cm of sediments (see also Sievers
and Wadley 2008). Mallol et al. (2013a) note that in their
experimental ﬁres the black layer sharply underlying ash
remains is not innately linked to the ﬁre event per se but instead represents the secondary charring of the surface in which
the ﬁreplace was built. Similarly, in our experiments we observed the charring of an organic-rich layer buried beneath
2 cm of sand with the development of a thin underlying rubeﬁed lens—a microstratigraphic superimposition that tends
to reﬂect the typical arrangement of a surface ﬁre but that in
this case actually represents the postdepositional alteration of
previously deposited sediments (Aldeias et al. 2016a).
The presence and extent of postdepositional alterations due
to overlying later ﬁres are relevant because any archaeological
materials embedded in secondarily altered deposits are temporally and consequently behaviorally unrelated to the ﬁre feature and its use. Accordingly, these materials and sediments
should be separated from the direct ﬁre residues during ex-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

cavations (Mallol et al. 2013a, 2013b), and special attention to
the provenience of burned artifacts versus the location of the
direct ﬁre residues is required, particularly when using such
materials for chronometric dating or inferences about hearth
function.

4. Evidence for In Situ versus Reworked Hearths
4.1. The Effects of Hearth Shape
There are a series of diagnostic sedimentary signatures created
by a simple horizontal ﬁre, such as a hearth or a campﬁre. Undisturbed ﬁres tend to present a microstratigraphy with an
uppermost ash-rich lens that may contain occasional charcoal
fragments. These deposits can rest on a charcoal-rich layer
that in turn overlies thermally altered substrates. This discrete
stratigraphic arrangement in well-preserved hearths has been
attested experimentally (e.g., Godino et al. 2011; Mallol et al.
2013a, 2013b; March, Ferreri, and Guez 1993; March et al.
2014; Miller et al. 2010; Wattez 1996).
Extensive experimental work by March and colleagues
(March 1992, 1996; March, Ferreri, and Guez 1993; March
et al. 2014) has included research on different hearth shapes,
namely simple, open horizontal ﬁres and those constructed
inside “cuvette” structures (i.e., shallow basin-shaped depressions). These experiments indicate that ﬁres built inside a depression have a relatively high thermal efﬁciency when compared with ﬂat open hearths. Cuvette ﬁres tend to show uniform
temperatures throughout a larger surface area and, because
of incomplete and slower combustion, have a higher ratio of
charcoal production compared with open horizontal features
(March 1992; March et al. 2014). These differences seem to
result from more controlled conditions of air circulation inside shallow depressions versus surface ﬁres. Accordingly, the
exposure to increased ﬂuctuations in open ventilation conditions results in higher average temperatures in ﬂat ﬁres (see
also Canti and Linford 2000), which, in turn, demands higher
quantities of wood to keep a ﬁre burning for a similar duration
event. Interestingly, March et al. (2014) also observed that the
substrates underlying cuvette ﬁres may not show any signs of
oxidation. This evidence is interpreted as resulting from the
rapid inﬁlling of the depression with combustion residues,
namely ashes and charcoals, acting as thermal isolators and
topographically raising the center of combustion (March et al.
2014). Such a hypothesis is in agreement with data on the
thermal isolation effects of ashes reported by Canti and Linford (2000) and further tested experimentally by Aldeias et al.
(2016a). Finally, variations in the diameter of open ﬁres can
be broadly correlated with the amount of fuel used, as shown
in the experimental work of Bentsen (2012).

4.2. Alteration of Underlying Substrate
A hearth built on top of sedimentary substrates will result in
some degree of thermal alteration of the material directly un-

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

derlying. Thermally altered substrates are a good indication
that a ﬁre was present in this exact location. Still, the degree and
aspect of thermal alteration varies greatly because it is intrinsically dependent on the nature and content of the substrate
itself and equally affected by pyrogenic properties, namely, ﬁre
temperature and duration. Thus far, the majority of work reporting on ﬁre-substrate alterations tends to concentrate on
the direct replication of site-speciﬁc archaeological evidence
(e.g., Brodard et al. 2015; Mallol et al. 2013a; Miller and Sievers
2012; Sherwood and Chapman 2005). A small number of experiments provide a wider range of factors that allow for indepth generalizations about the type of modiﬁcations expected
under certain conditions and, consequentially, what such alterations may mean for inferring past pyrogenic conditions.
One of the common thermally induced modiﬁcations is the
development of a rubeﬁed (i.e., reddening) layer usually related to oxidation of iron-rich minerals. Experimental work by
Canti and Linford (2000) produced varied results, with some
of the experimental ﬁres showing a 2–3 cm thick rubeﬁed base
whereas others showed no macroscopic alteration. These differences were not necessarily a direct function of temperature,
because ﬁres registering lower subsurface temperatures actually became reddened while the hottest ﬁres did not. These ﬁres
were not built on top of the same type of sediments, with ﬁres
on humic topsoil not presenting oxidized bases (Canti and
Linford 2000). Similar results were obtained by Bellomo (1993),
who also did not observe any rubeﬁcation with the burning of
several tree stumps on sandy humic soils, though in this case it
is unclear whether this can also be related to the lower temperatures reached (a mean maximum of 2507C was recorded).
Bellomo further suggests that wood bark may act as a thermal
insulator preventing heat transfer to the surrounding soil, a
hypothesis that rests largely untested in the case of natural tree
stump ﬁres. In any case, these studies suggest that soil organic
matter might prevent substantial rubeﬁcation.
Not all substrate thermal alteration is in the form of reddened substrates. Other experimental ﬁres show that substrate
organic matter has an important role on the formation of
black thermally altered zones underlying ﬁre features. March
et al. (2014) noted the formation of thick blackish zones underneath ﬁres on humic soils and volcanic or aeolian silts rich
in organic matter. The formation of black basal layers was
further investigated experimentally by Mallol et al. (2013a),
suggesting that these deposits can represent the ﬁre-altered
organic-rich surface and are not the result of direct combustion residues (i.e., the common attribution of black layers to
charcoal-rich residues underlying an ash layer).
The nature and components of the substrate logically play
an important role in oxidation and associated reddening (i.e.,
whether there are iron minerals to be oxidized in the ﬁrst
place). March et al. (2014) showed that oxidation dimensions
are related to both the temperatures attained and the nature
of the substrate, with reddish alteration visible between 3007C
and 5007C depending on soil types. In our experimental studies with a variety of sediment types, all sediments presented

S199

some degree of rubeﬁcation with the exception of heat applied to limestone sand and calcitic ashes (Aldeias et al. 2016a).
In both of these cases, there were mineralogical and color
changes associated with thermal alteration, but these did not
assume the form of a rubeﬁed substrate. In the cases where
reddening was observed, the main factors driving its extension were sediment type and, to a lesser extent, mean temperature and combustion duration. The average thickness of
the rubeﬁed layer was ~6 cm, with a maximum thickness of
8.5 cm obtained in wet quartz sands heated for a longer duration of 19 hours at ~6007C. Similar to the results of previous researchers (Canti and Linford 2000; March et al. 2014),
when organic matter was present in the subsurface, there was
a marked decrease of visible alteration compared with examples from the same heating conditions and the same type of
sediments but without an organic component; speciﬁcally, sediments with organic matter showed only a 3 cm thick rubeﬁed
substrate, when compared with a 6 cm thick rubeﬁed layer using
the same type of sediments but without organic matter (Aldeias
et al. 2016a).
In terms of the relationship between substrate alteration and
hearth shape, experimentation has shown that a ﬁre built on a
ﬂat surface can produce an underlying semispherical conﬁguration of altered sediments when seen in cross section (Aldeias et al. 2016a). This topography, readily visible in the case
of rubeﬁcation, is an outcome of the way heat transfer occurs
in the subsurface and is not related to the original shape of the
hearth. That ﬂat surface ﬁres can have a cuvette-shaped substrate is, therefore, shown through controlled experimentation,
actualistic studies (Bellomo 1993), and heat-transfer models (e.g.,
Brodard et al. 2015; March et al. 2014). These secondarily altered
deposits should not be interpreted as intentional hearth construction in a depression.
4.3. The Role of Anthropic Actions
Besides forming combustion residues, humans can also act as
agents of erosion and reworking of anthropogenic sediments.
Of particular interest is the identiﬁcation of syndepositional
(i.e., after formation and before burial) human interactions
with ﬁre residues, as such data can give us information on
space use, maintenance activities, and, at times, ﬁre functions.
For instance, in our experimental work with hearths used for
roasting shellﬁsh, Aldeias et al. (2016b) showed that spreading and dumping of ﬁre residues outside the cooking area was
an essential step in the cooking procedures. Such actions resulted in the absence of a microstratigraphy associated with
intact hearths, which in this case would not be due to poor
preservation of the ﬁre features but because removal of combustion residues was an intentional activity that directly related
to hearth use.
Asserting possible functions for human manipulation involves better characterization of the effects of actions such as
trampling, scooping, sweeping, and dumping of ﬁre residues.
These have also been tested experimentally. Although having

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S200

Current Anthropology

the lowest effects in terms of disturbing the original integrity
of the ﬁre features, experiments with trampling produce the
most diagnostic sedimentary signatures. Miller et al. (2010)
noted that after short episodes of trampling (1 minute duration), the original structure and microstratigraphic organization of the hearths was still discernible in thin section,
with the charcoal layer overlying altered substrate. Similar results were obtained by Mallol et al. (2013b) in trampling episodes of much longer duration (over the course of 21 days),
where the blurred limits of the original structures were visible
macroscopically, though in thin section the uppermost ash
component was intrinsically mixed with angular charcoal fragments, subrounded sediment rip ups, and few rounded ash
aggregates. The underlying microstratigraphy showed little
modiﬁcation from nontrampled substrates. Both studies suggest that trampling results only in alterations of the uppermost
deposits (only a few centimeters thick) with increased sedimentary compaction, microscopic granular structure, abundant
in situ crushing of fragile artifacts (e.g., snapped and crushed
bones), and the incorporation of burned remains into the underlying sediments (Mallol et al. 2013b; Miller et al. 2010).
Increased sedimentary disturbance was obtained in experiments involving sweeping and dumping of combustion residues. Sweeping produced the accumulation of a heterogeneous
mix of deposits with a reworked ash layer embedding fragments of thermally altered substrate and a chaotic mixture of
artifacts showing different degrees of burning (Mallol et al.
2013b; Miller et al. 2010). This accumulation rests on top of
substrates not affected by heating. Scooping and dumping of ﬁre
residues performed by Miller et al. (2010) resulted in somewhat
similar deposits, with an open chaotic structure containing
burned artifacts and thermally altered sediment aggregates
embedded in a matrix of rounded calcitic ashes. Miller et al.
(2010) propose a possible distinction in terms of grain-size
distribution between sweeping and dumping, with coarser heterogeneous deposits in dumped deposits and ﬁner grain sorting potentially associated with sweeping actions. In general,
these experimental results show that combustion accumulations resulting from sweeping and dumping do not preserve the
original hearth structure. Instead, the spreading of combusted
materials leads to a set of sedimentary characteristics associated with secondary ash dumps that allows for their identiﬁcation as disturbed, not in situ, accumulations of combustion
material in the archaeological record.

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

and Cabanes 2007; Berna 2010; Berna, Matthews, and Weiner
2004; Berna et al. 2007; Braadbaart and Poole 2008; Cabanes,
Weiner, and Shahack-Gross 2011; Cohen-Ofri et al. 2006;
Karkanas 2010; Karkanas et al. 2000; Schiegl et al. 1996;
Weiner 2010; Weiner, Goldberg, and Bar-Yosef 1993, 2002).
From such data, the degree of preservation and taphonomy of
combustion-associated sediments can be indirectly assessed,
and past geochemical conditions can be inferred.
In terms of the effects of bioturbation, a recent study has
speciﬁcally dealt with the interaction of some carnivores with
hearth features, which can result in the reworking of the combustion structures (Camarós et al., forthcoming). Bears, in
particular, were observed to interact and signiﬁcantly disturb
ﬁre residues used for meat cooking by rubbing themselves in
the ashes and charcoal, digging holes up to 50 cm in diameter,
and displacing stones and bones away from the original hearth
location. As a result, the original experimental hearth sediments
and stone arrangement were no longer recognizable (Camarós
et al., forthcoming).

5. Archaeological Signiﬁcance
The archaeological signiﬁcance of ﬁres depends on being able
to attest their anthropogenic origin. We need of course to keep
in mind that ﬁres are natural processes and a phenomenon
that has occurred throughout Earth’s geological history. Ultimately, therefore, reconstructing instances of anthropogenic
(human-made) ﬁre cannot rely solely on the nature of the
artifacts per se (the aforementioned direct and indirect proxies) but needs to take into consideration their overall contextual association (Goldberg, Miller, and Mentzer 2017). “Context” refers to the entirety of data pertaining to the internal
distribution, orientation patterns, and external association of
burned sedimentary components. In other words, it embodies
the internal structure of combusted residues and their association with adjacent archaeological data. Understanding the
contextual framework is relevant for higher behavioral inferences beyond the assessment of whether a material is burned or
not and is essential to tease apart whether (1) burned residues
are in fact related to anthropogenic activities, (2) the presence
or absence of burned residues is due to human behavior, or
(3) burned residues are instead associated with natural landscape burning episodes. It is this understanding of the broader
context of combustion remains that is indeed fundamental for
well-grounded interpretations of past human pyrotechnology.

4.4. The Effects of Biogenic and Geogenic Processes
Experimentally testing the effects of biogenic and geogenic
processes faces the issue of time. It is indeed difﬁcult to test
diagenetic processes that occur over hundreds and thousands
of years in archaeological ﬁre features. Therefore, the overwhelming quantity of data we have on taphonomy and diagenesis deals with individual combustion components and their
stability under varied environmental conditions (e.g., Albert

5.1. Indirect Proxies: Burned, Yes, but When?
Archaeological sites are far from being pristine contexts even
under ideal situations of preservation. Therefore, as mentioned
above, the identiﬁcation of traces for ﬁre often relies on the detection and analysis of the burned artifacts that tend to withstand the passage of time better than the more fragile combustion residues. These are the so-called indirect proxies for

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

ﬁres. Despite their unquestionable relevance, what the research
described above does show is that we must distinguish between
different types of indirect ﬁre proxies. On one hand, there are
materials that are used, consumed, and burned at the same
time that a hearth is active. This heating is, therefore, contemporaneous with the ﬁre event and potentially related to hearth
function, the type of artifacts present, and the kinds of human activities that took place around the hearth. Moreover,
the study of these burned materials can provide a wealth of
information about the ﬁre itself because different materials
will respond to temperatures in distinct ways.
Again, however, not all burning results from direct contact
with a ﬁre, as there might be a considerable elapsed interval of
time between artifact manufacture, discard, burial, and postdepositional exposure to heat. For example, a ﬁre built on top
of previous occupations has the potential to directly alter underlying deposits and embedded artifacts. In such cases, the
thermal alteration may signiﬁcantly postdate the ﬁre event,
and these burned materials are neither temporally nor behaviorally associated with the overlying hearth. This is particularly
pertinent in archaeological sites where a thin layer of sediments
often denotes several human occupations overlying each other
and represents sedimentary accumulations over hundreds or
even thousands of years.
Thus, in order to distinguish between instances of contemporaneous burning from postdepositional alteration, we need
to better understand how ﬁres (both anthropic hearths and
natural ﬁres) affect the surrounding and especially the underlying deposits under a wide variety of conditions and substrate
sediment types. Above all, such interpretations must be based
on context, for which detailed characterization of the sedimentary and microstratigraphic association of burned materials is
essential. For instance, we can expect the majority of heated
artifacts embedded in ashes to be related to the active ﬁres,
whereas those retrieved from thermally altered substrates most
probably represent older artifacts pertaining to distinct and
possibly markedly different types of human occupations. This
distinction is important for archaeological interpretations, studies on spatial analyses, and dating of human occupations.

S201

to distinguish between discrete activities that might have occurred above or around a ﬁre. On the other hand, there is also a
conceptual issue. Several functions attributed to ﬁres are difﬁcult to test for or are even untestable through archaeological
data simply because they leave no sedimentary signature. For
instance, light and warmth are automatic outcomes of every ﬁre
regardless of whether their production was the intended objective in the ﬁrst place. Tackling such functions directly might
be a frustrating endeavor. However, it might be possible to
better discern patterns in the role of ﬁre by comparing the evidence between several sites and resorting to speciﬁcally targeted experimentation to build testable research hypotheses.
For example, the amount of light produced by one type of fuel
compared to another can be tested experimentally (e.g., does
bone fuel produce more luminosity than pine wood ﬁres?). In
turn, the obtained results might drive expectations that can
be veriﬁed between different combustion features and distinct
sites, attributing a degree of probability that, in this example,
light was a likely intended hearth function.
Such intersite comparative analyses (with comparable excavation and recording methodologies) are still fairly infrequent in archaeological research, though substantial efforts for
data collection and excavation standardization have been seen
in recent years. In order to interpret hearth function, our research questions need to be tailored to the type of data available. Archaeological experimentation is key for assessing such
information on what to expect. As graphically illustrated in
ﬁgure 3, putative hearth uses might be dependent on multiple
variables, and these need to be addressed from an interdisciplinary perspective—not just from the study of the burned artifacts themselves but also the sediments embedding them and
their contextual arrangement.

6. Final Comments and Future Directions
The identiﬁcation of anthropic ﬁre use is an important behavioral question both in terms of its ﬁrst appearance and the

5.2. What Can We Say about Hearth Function?
The array of behaviorally relevant functions of ﬁres (light,
warmth, cooking, protection against predators, etc.) is often
stated and lies at the core of why ﬁre technology is seen as a
major technological advancement in human evolution. It is
also, nonetheless, one of the most frustrating and elusive aspects of ancient pyrotechnological research because pinpointing the exact function of a particular Paleolithic combustion
feature has proven to be extremely challenging. The reasons for
this are varied. On one hand, there is the nature of the direct
data we are dealing with; that is, the incompleteness of the archaeological record even in instances where a hearth has been
clearly identiﬁed. As seen throughout this review, the available
artifactual and sedimentary data often lack enough resolution

Figure 3. Graphical illustration of the potentially complex interplaying of variables for hearth function determination.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S202

Current Anthropology

recurrence of its application in human adaptive strategies. Detailed analyses on the content and context of ﬁre residues can
provide a wealth of information. Still, we face conceptual and
operational issues on how to identify ephemeral or patchy evidence of burning, particularly in older contexts where archaeological visibility and association might be an issue. Equally
challenging is the archaeological identiﬁcation of ﬁre production, that is, being able to start a ﬁre, versus simply its management. Experimental data described above show the sedimentary invisibility of several relevant aspects, namely relighting
episodes. This suggests that thus far, we cannot distinguish between ﬁres that were maintained continuously lit from those
revived in short intervals of time. Such potential lack of sedimentary evidence has consequences for questions relating to
the capacity of past humans (e.g., western European Neanderthals) to manufacture ﬁre (Roebroeks and Villa 2011; Sandgathe
et al. 2011a, 2011b). Consequently, questions dealing with
the capability of humans to start a ﬁre versus their choice to
use or not use ﬁre resources might go undetectable in the archaeological record.
How much ﬁre was present in a given site and what those
combustion events suggest in terms of human selection and
choices (e.g., fuels, hearth construction, and syndepositional
maintenance activities) are both questions that proﬁt from a
solid experimental background in order to interpret the complexity of the archaeological evidence. The majority of archaeological experimentation tends to focus on what can happen but not as much on identifying the circumstances under
which it does—or did—happen. This distinction is crucial.
Many of the data currently available on ﬁre experimentation
deal with site-speciﬁc objectives, that is, the replication of what
is seen in a particular archaeological layer. Such actualistic experiments (also called realistic or replicative experiments) are
driven by the goal of seeing whether a certain type of evidence
can be manufactured or produced or replicated. While these
are indeed important research questions, they tend to bear
little applicability for other archaeological settings and contexts. For instance, many experiments use sieved sediments
from a particular site to conduct their experimentation. While
there might be issues on how analogous such sediments truly
are to the actual stratigraphic layer, what is also important is
that the obtained results relate to that site alone, entailing little applicability in other contexts. Moreover, many actualistic
experiments produce confounding results, and we are left with
contradictory, nonreplicable data that are at most anecdotal
evidence or are difﬁcult to interpret. This is mainly due to the
lack of control on certain variables during experimentation.
Fortunately, in recent years, we have increasingly seen research applying more tightly controlled experimentation. By
limiting the number of variables, both in laboratory and ﬁeld
conditions, we have progressively gained a clearer picture of
relevant factors in the formation and integrity of ﬁre residues. For a long time, any blackened or reddened sediments
or artifacts were commonly—and often wrongly—interpreted
as hearths, whereas currently we understand that an array of

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

techniques can be used to closely investigate whether a material was burned, the degree of its alteration, and its microcontextual association. Moreover, an important development
is the close integration that archaeological-driven experimentation has had with other disciplines, for example, borrowing
analytical techniques from the earth sciences, chemistry, and
biology. A growing line of research applies microcontextual
approaches instead of averaging out the sedimentary debris
from ﬁre features. Such innovative methodologies are promising research avenues for the analyses of particular sedimentary components that until recently had remained virtually
invisible.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Max Planck Society, and I
would like to acknowledge the support provided by JeanJacques Hublin and Shannon McPherron. I would like to thank
Paul Goldberg and Harold L. Dibble for their comments on an
earlier version of this manuscript. The commentaries of two
anonymous reviewers greatly helped to improve this manuscript. A special thanks to Dennis Sandgathe, Francesco Berna,
and the Wenner-Gren Foundation for the invitation to and the
organization of the symposium “Fire and the Genus Homo.”

References Cited
Albert, R. M., M. K. Bamford, and D. Cabanes. 2006. Taphonomy of phytoliths
and macroplants in different soils from Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) and the
application to Plio-Pleistocene palaeoanthropological samples. Quaternary
International 148(1):78–94.
Albert, R. M., F. Berna, and P. Goldberg. 2012. Insights on Neanderthal ﬁre use
at Kebara Cave (Israel) through high resolution study of prehistoric combustion features: evidence from phytoliths and thin sections. Quaternary
International 247(1):278–293.
Albert, R. M., and D. Cabanes. 2007. Fire in prehistory: an experimental approach to combustion processes and phytolith remains. Israel Journal of Earth
Sciences 56(2–4):175–189.
Aldeias, V., P. Goldberg, D. Sandgathe, F. Berna, H. L. Dibble, S. P. McPherron,
A. Turq, and Z. Rezek. 2012. Evidence for Neandertal use of ﬁre at Roc de
Marsal (France). Journal of Archaeological Science 39(7):2414–2423.
Aldeias, Vera, Harold L. Dibble, Dennis Sandgathe, Paul Goldberg, and Shannon J. P. McPherron. 2016a. How heat alters underlying deposits and implications for archaeological ﬁre features: a controlled experiment. Journal
of Archaeological Science 67:64–79.
Aldeias, Vera, Shira Gur-Arieh, Raquel Maria, Patricia Monteiro, and Pedro
Cura. 2016b. Shell we cook it? an experimental approach to the microarchaeological record of shellﬁsh roasting. Archaeological and Anthropological
Sciences, doi:10.1007/s12520-016-0413-1.
Barkai, Ran, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, and Avi Gopher. 2017. Fire for a reason:
barbecue at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel. Current Anthropology
58(suppl. 16):S314–S328.
Bellomo, R. V. 1993. A methodological approach for identifying archaeological evidence of ﬁre resulting from human activities. Journal of Archaeological Science 20(5):525–553.
Bennett, J. L. 1999. Thermal alteration of buried bone. Journal of Archaeological
Science 26(1):1–8.
Bentsen, Silje Evjenth. 2012. Size matters: preliminary results from an experimental approach to interpret Middle Stone Age hearths. Quaternary International 270:95–102.
———. 2013. Controlling the heat: an experimental approach to Middle
Stone Age pyrotechnology. South African Archaeological Bulletin 68(198):
137–145.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

Beresford-Jones, D. G., K. Johnson, A. G. Pullen, A. J. E. Pryor, J. Svoboda,
and M. K. Jones. 2010. Burning wood or burning bone? a reconsideration of
ﬂotation evidence from Upper Palaeolithic (Gravettian) sites in the Moravian Corridor. Journal of Archaeological Science 37(11):2799–2811.
Berna, F. 2010. Bone alteration and diagenesis. In Scientiﬁc methods and
cultural heritage: an introduction to the application of materials science to
archaeometry and conservation science. G. Artioli, ed. Pp. 364–367. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Berna, F., and P. Goldberg. 2008. Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and
associated hominin behavior in Israel. Israel Journal of Earth Sciences 56:
107–121.
Berna, F., A. Matthews, and S. Weiner. 2004. Solubilities of bone mineral from
archaeological sites: the recrystallization window. Journal of Archaeological
Science 31(7):867–882.
Berna, Francesco, Adi Behar, Ruth Shahack-Gross, John Berg, Elisabetta
Boaretto, Ayelet Gilboa, Ilan Sharon, et al. 2007. Sediments exposed to high
temperatures: reconstructing pyrotechnological processes in Late Bronze
and Iron Age strata at Tel Dor (Israel). Journal of Archaeological Science 34
(3):358–373.
Braadbaart, Freek, and Imogen Poole. 2008. Morphological, chemical and
physical changes during charcoaliﬁcation of wood and its relevance to archaeological contexts. Journal of Archaeological Science 35(9):2434–2445.
Braadbaart, Freek, Imogen Poole, Hans D. J. Huisman, and Bertil van Os.
2012. Fuel, ﬁre and heat: an experimental approach to highlight the potential
of studying ash and char remains from archaeological contexts. Journal of
Archaeological Science 39(4):836–847.
Brochier, Jacques E. 1983. Combustion et parcage des herbivores domestiques: le point de vue du sédimentologue. Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique
Française: Comptes Rendus des Séances Mensuelles Paris 80(5):143–145.
———. 1996. Feuilles ou fumiers? observations sur le rôle des poussières
sphérolitiques dans l’interprétation des dépôts archéologiques holocènes.
Anthropozoologica 24:19–30.
Brodard, Aurélie, Delphine Lacanette-Puyo, Pierre Guibert, François Lévêque,
Albane Burens, and Laurent Carozza. 2015. A new process of reconstructing
archaeological ﬁres from their impact on sediment: a coupled experimental
and numerical approach based on the case study of hearths from the cave of
Les Fraux (Dordogne, France). Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences,
doi:10.1007/s12520-015-0250-7.
Brown, Kyle S., Curtis W. Marean, Andy I. R. Herries, Zenobia Jacobs, Chantal
Tribolo, David Braun, David L. Roberts, Michael C. Meyer, and Jocelyn
Bernatchez. 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of early modern humans.
Science 325(5942):859–862.
Buenger, Brent A. 2003. The impact of wildland and prescribed ﬁre on archaeological resources. PhD dissertation, University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Cabanes, D., S. Weiner, and R. Shahack-Gross. 2011. Stability of phytoliths in
the archaeological record: a dissolution study of modern and fossil phytoliths. Journal of Archaeological Science 38(9):2480–2490.
Cain, Chester R. 2005. Using burned animal bone to look at Middle Stone
Age occupation and behavior. Journal of Archaeological Science 32(6):873–
884.
Camarós, E., M. Cueto, L. Teira, Susanne C. Münzel, F. Plassard, P. Arias, and
F. Rivals. Forthcoming. Bears in the scene: Pleistocene complex interactions
with implications concerning the study of Neanderthal behavior. Quaternary International. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2015.11.027.
Campbell, G. S., J. D. Jungbauer Jr., K. L. Bristow, and R. D. Hungerford. 1995.
Soil temperature and water content beneath a surface ﬁre. Soil Science 159
(6):363–374.
Canti, M. 1998. Origin of calcium carbonate granules found in buried soils
and Quaternary deposits. Boreas 27(4):275–288.
———. 2003. Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant
ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena 54(3):339–361.
Canti, M. G., and N. Linford. 2000. The effects of ﬁre on archaeological soils
and sediments: temperature and colour relationships. Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society 66:385–395.
Chu, Vikki, Lior Regev, Steve Weiner, and Elisabetta Boaretto. 2008. Differentiating between anthropogenic calcite in plaster, ash and natural calcite
using infrared spectroscopy: implications in archaeology. Journal of Archaeological Science 35(4):905–911.
Cohen-Ofri, I., L. Weiner, E. Boaretto, G. Mintz, and S. Weiner. 2006. Modern
and fossil charcoal: aspects of structure and diagenesis. Journal of Archaeological Science 33(3):428–439.
Costamagno, S., I. Théry-Parisot, J. P. Brugal, and R. Guilbert. 2005. Taphonomic consequences of the use of bones as fuel: experimental data and

S203
archaeological applications. In Biosphere to lithosphere: new studies in
vertebrate taphonomy. T. O’Connor, ed. Pp. 51–62. London: Oxbow.
Courty, M. A., E. Carbonell, J. Vallverdú Poch, and R. Banerjee. 2012. Microstratigraphic and multi-analytical evidence for advanced Neanderthal pyrotechnology at Abric Romaní (Capellades, Spain). Quaternary International
247(1):294–312.
Dibble, Harold L., Aylar Abodolahzadeh, Vera Aldeias, Paul Goldberg, Shannon P. McPherron, and Dennis M. Sandgathe. 2017. How did hominins
adapt to Ice Age Europe without ﬁre? Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):
S278–S287.
Dibble, Harold L., Francesco Berna, Paul Goldberg, Shannon P. McPherron,
Susan Mentzer, Laura Niven, Daniel Richter, Dennis Sandgathe, Isabelle
Théry-Parisot, and Alan Turq. 2009. A preliminary report on Pech de l’Azé
IV, Layer 8 (Middle Paleolithic, France). PaleoAnthropology 2009:182–219,
doi:10.4207/PA.2009.ART30.
Elbaum, Rivka, Steve Weiner, Rosa M. Albert, and Michael Elbaum. 2003.
Detection of burning of plant materials in the archaeological record by
changes in the refractive indices of siliceous phytoliths. Journal of Archaeological Science 30(2):217–226.
Etiegni, L., and A. G. Campbell. 1991. Physical and chemical characteristics of
wood ash. Bioresource Technology 37(2):173–178.
Gabucio, Maria Joana, Isabel Cáceres, Jordi Rosell, Palmira Saladié, and Josep
Vallverdú. 2014. From small bone fragments to Neanderthal activity areas:
the case of Level O of the Abric Romaní (Capellades, Barcelona, Spain).
Quaternary International 330:36–51.
Godino, Ivan Briz, Myrian Álvarez, Andrea Balbo, Débora Zurro, Marco
Madella, Ximena Villagrán, and Charles French. 2011. Towards highresolution shell midden archaeology: experimental and ethnoarchaeology
in Tierra del Fuego (Argentina). Quaternary International 239:125–134.
Goldberg, P., H. Dibble, F. Berna, D. Sandgathe, S. J. P. McPherron, and A.
Turq. 2012. New evidence on Neandertal use of ﬁre: examples from Roc de
Marsal and Pech de l’Azé IV. Quaternary International 247:325–340.
Goldberg, Paul, Christopher E. Miller, and Susan M. Mentzer. 2017. Recognizing ﬁre in the Paleolithic archaeological record. Current Anthropology
58(suppl. 16):S175–S190.
Gonçalves, D., T. J. U. Thompson, and E. Cunha. 2011. Implications of heatinduced changes in bone on the interpretation of funerary behaviour and
practice. Journal of Archaeological Science 38(6):1308–1313.
Gowlett, J. A. J. 2006. The early settlement of northern Europe: ﬁre history in
the context of climate change and the social brain. Comtes Rendu Palevol 5:
299–310.
Gowlett, J. A. J., J. S. Brink, Adam Caris, Sally Hoare, and S. M. Rucina. 2017.
Evidence of burning from bushﬁres in southern and east Africa and its relevance to hominin evolution. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S206–
S216.
Gur-Arieh, S., E. Mintz, E. Boaretto, and R. Shahack-Gross. 2013. An ethnoarchaeological study of cooking installations in rural Uzbekistan: development of a new method for identiﬁcation of fuel sources. Journal of Archaeological Science 40(12):4331–4347.
Gur-Arieh, Shira, Ruth Shahack-Gross, Aren M. Maeir, Gunnar Lehmann,
Louise A. Hitchcock, and Elisabetta Boaretto. 2014. The taphonomy and
preservation of wood and dung ashes found in archaeological cooking installations: case studies from Iron Age Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 46:50–67.
Henry, Amanda G. 2017. Neanderthal cooking and the costs of ﬁre. Current
Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S329–S336.
Henry, Auréade, and Isabelle Théry-Parisot. 2014. From Evenk campﬁres to
prehistoric hearths: charcoal analysis as a tool for identifying the use of rotten wood as fuel. Journal of Archaeological Science 52:321–336.
Huisman, D. J., F. Braadbaart, I. M. van Wijk, and B. J. H. van Os. 2012.
Ashes to ashes, charcoal to dust: micromorphological evidence for ashinduced disintegration of charcoal in Early Neolithic (LBK) soil features in
Elsloo (The Netherlands). Journal of Archaeological Science 39(4):994–1004.
James, Steven, R. W. Dennell, Allan S. Gilbert, Henry T. Lewis, J. A. J. Gowlett,
Thomas F. Lynch, W. C. McGrew, et al. 1989. Hominid use of ﬁre in the
Lower and Middle Pleistocene. Current Anthropology 30(1):1–26.
Joly, D., and R. March. 2003. Étude des ossements brûlés: nouvelles méthodes
pour la détermination des températures. In Le feu domestique et ses structures
au né olithique et aux â ges des mé taux: actes du colloque de Bourg-en-Bresse
et Beaune, 7 et 8 octobre 2000. Montagnac: M. Mergoil.
Karkanas, P. 2010. Preservation of anthropogenic materials under different
geochemical processes: a mineralogical approach. Quaternary International
214:63–69.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S204

Current Anthropology

Karkanas, P., O. Bar-Yosef, P. Goldberg, and S. Weiner. 2000. Diagenesis in
prehistoric caves: the use of minerals that form in situ to assess the completeness of the archaeological record. Journal of Archaeological Science 27
(10):915–929.
Karkanas, P., R. Shahack-Gross, A. Ayalon, M. Bar-Matthews, R. Barkai, A.
Frumkin, A. Gopher, and M. C. Stiner. 2007. Evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre at the end of the Lower Paleolithic: site-formation processes at Qesem
Cave, Israel. Journal of Human Evolution 53(2):197–212.
Laloy, J. 1981. Recherche d’une méthode pour l’exploitation des témoins de
combustion. Paris: Centre de Recherches Préhistoriques, Cahiers.
Maki, David, Jeffrey A. Homburg, and Scott D. Brosowske. 2006. Thermally
activated mineralogical transformations in archaeological hearths: inversion from maghemite gFe2O4 phase to haematite aFe2O4 form. Archaeological Prospection 13(3):207–227.
Mallol, C., C. M. Hernández, D. Cabanes, A. Sistiaga, J. Machado, T. Rodríguez, L. Pérez, and B. Galván. 2013a. The black layer of Middle Palaeolithic
combustion structures: interpretation and archaeostratigraphic implications.
Journal of Archaeological Science 40(5):2515–2537.
Mallol, C., F. W. Marlowe, B. M. Wood, and C. C. Porter. 2007. Earth, wind,
and ﬁre: ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza ﬁres. Journal of Archaeological Science 34(12):2035–2052.
Mallol, Carolina, Cristo M. Hernández, Dan Cabanes, Jorge Machado, Ainara
Sistiaga, Leopoldo Pérez, and Bertila Galván. 2013b. Human actions performed on simple combustion structures: an experimental approach to the
study of Middle Palaeolithic ﬁre. Quaternary International 315:3–15.
March, R. J., J. C. Ferreri, and C. Guez. 1993. Étude des foyers préhistoriques des gisements Magdaléniens du Bassin parisien: l’approche expérimentale. Mémoires du Groupement Archéologique de Seine-et-Marne (1):87–
95.
March, R. J., and G. Wunsch. 2003. Loupes et lentilles obscures: à propos de la
fonction des structures de combustion. In Le feu domestique et ses structures au né olithique et aux â ges des mé taux: actes du colloque de Bourg-enBresse et Beaune, 7 et 8 octobre 2000. Montagnac: M. Mergoil.
March, Ramiro J. 1992. L’utilisation du bois dans les foyers préhistoriques: une
approche expérimentale. Bulletin de la Societé Botanique Française: Actualités Botaniques 139(2–4):245–253, doi:10.1080/01811789.1992.10827103.
———. 2013. Searching for the functions of ﬁre structures in Eynan (Mallaha)
and their formation processes: a geochemical approach. In Natuﬁan foragers
in the Levant: terminal Pleistocene social changes in western Asia. Ofer BarYosef and Franç ois R. Valla, eds. Ann Arbor, MI: International Monographs
in Prehistory.
March, Ramiro Javier. 1996. L’Etude des structures de combustion préhistoriques: une approche interdisciplinaire. In XIII International Congress of
Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences. O. Bar Yosef, L. Cavalli-Sforza, R. J.
March, and D. R. Piperno, ed. Forli-Italia-8/14, pp. 251–275.
March, Ramiro Javier, Alexandre Lucquin, Delphine Joly, Juan Carlos Ferreri,
and Mohamad Muhieddine. 2014. Processes of formation and alteration
of archaeological ﬁre structures: complexity viewed in the light of experimental approaches. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 21(1):1–
45.
Marquer, L., T. Otto, R. Nespoulet, and L. Chiotti. 2010. A new approach to
study the fuel used in hearths by hunter-gatherers at the Upper Palaeolithic
site of Abri Pataud (Dordogne, France). Journal of Archaeological Science
37(11):2735–2746.
Matthews, W. 2010. Geoarchaeology and taphonomy of plant remains and
microarchaeological residues in early urban environments in the Ancient
Near East. Quaternary International 214(1/2):98–113.
Mazza, Paul Peter Anthony, Fabio Martini, Benedetto Sala, Maurizio Magi,
Maria Perla Colombini, Gianna Giachi, Francesco Landucci, Cristina Lemorini, Francesca Modugno, and Erika Ribechini. 2006. A new Palaeolithic
discovery: tar-hafted stone tools in a European Mid-Pleistocene bone-bearing
bed. Journal of Archaeological Science 33(9):1310–1318.
Meignen, L., P. Goldberg, and O. Bar-Yosef. 2007. The hearths at Kebara Cave
and their role in site formation processes. In Kebara Cave Mt. Carmel,
Israel: the middle and upper Paleolithic archaeology, pt. 1. O. Bar-Yosef and
L. Meignen, eds. Pp. 91–122. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University.
Meignen, Liliane, Paul Goldberg, and Ofer Bar-Yosef. 2014. Together in the
ﬁeld: interdisciplinary work in Kebara and Hayonim caves (Israel). Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, doi:10.1007/s12520-014-0185-4.
Mentzer, Susan M. 2009. Bone as a fuel source: the effects of initial fragment
size distribution. In Gestion des combustibles au Paleolithique et au Mesolithique: nouveaux outiles, nouvelles interpretations. Isabelle Thé ry-Parisot,

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

Sandrine Costamagno, and Auré ade Henry, eds. Pp. 53–64. Oxford: Archaeopress.
———. 2014. Microarchaeological approaches to the identiﬁcation and interpretation of combustion features in prehistoric archaeological sites. Journal
of Archaeological Method and Theory 21(3):616–668.
Miller, Christopher E., N. Conard, P. Goldberg, and F. Berna. 2010. Dumping, sweeping and trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis
of anthropogenically modiﬁed combustion features. Palethnology 2:25–37.
Miller, Christopher E., and Christine Sievers. 2012. An experimental micromorphological investigation of bedding construction in the Middle Stone
Age of Sibudu, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 39(10):3039–
3051.
Morin, Eugène. 2010. Taphonomic implications of the use of bone as fuel.
Palethnology 2:209–217.
Nicholson, Rebecca A. 1992. Bone survival: the effects of sedimentary abrasion and trampling on fresh and cooked bone. International Journal of
Osteoarchaeology 2(1):79–90.
Pereira, Paulo, Xavier Úbeda, and Deborah A. Martin. 2012. Fire severity effects
on ash chemical composition and water-extractable elements. Geoderma
191:105–114.
Piperno, D. R., D. M. Pearsall, R. A. Benfer Jr., L. Kealhofer, Z. Zhao, and
Q. Jiang. 1999. Phytolith morphology. Science 283(5406):1265–1266.
Roebroeks, W., and P. Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
108(13):5209–5214.
Sandgathe, Dennis M., Harold L. Dibble, Paul Goldberg, Shannon P. McPherron, Alain Turq, L. Niven, and J. Hodgkins. 2011a. Timing of the appearance of habitual ﬁre use. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108(29), doi:10.1073/pnas.1106759108.
———. 2011b. On the role of ﬁre in Neandertal adaptations in western Europe:
evidence from Pech de l’Azé and Roc de Marsal, France. PaleoAnthropology
2011:216–242.
Schiegl, S., P. Goldberg, O. Bar-Yosef, and S. Weiner. 1996. Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic and mineralogical observations, and their archaeological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 23(5):763–781.
Schiegl, S., P. Goldberg, H. U. Pfretzschner, and N. J. Conard. 2003. Paleolithic
burnt bone horizons from the Swabian Jura: distinguishing between in situ
ﬁreplaces and dumping areas. Geoarchaeology 18(5):541–565.
Schiegl, Solveig, Simcha Lev-Yadun, Ofer Bar-Yosef, Ahmed El Goresy, and
Stephen Weiner. 1994. Siliceous aggregates from prehistoric wood ash: a
major component of sediments in Kebara and Hayonim caves (Israel). Israel
Journal of Earth Sciences 43(3/4):267–278.
Schmidt, Patrick. 2013. Le traitement thermique des matières lithiques: que
se passe-t-il lors de la chauffe?. BAR International Series 2470. Oxford:
Archaeopress.
Schmidt, Patrick, Guillaume Porraz, Aneta Slodczyk, Ludovic Bellot-Gurlet,
William Archer, and Christopher E. Miller. 2013. Heat treatment in the
South African Middle Stone Age: temperature induced transformations of
silcrete and their technological implications. Journal of Archaeological Science 40(9):3519–3531.
Sergant, J., P. Crombé, and Y. Perdaen. 2006. The “invisible” hearths: a contribution to the discernment of Mesolithic non-structured surface hearths.
Journal of Archaeological Science 33(7):999–1007.
Shahack-Gross, R., F. Berna, P. Karkanas, C. Lemorini, A. Gopher, and R.
Barkai. 2014. Evidence for the repeated use of a central hearth at Middle
Pleistocene (300 ky ago) Qesem Cave, Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 44:12–21.
Shahack-Gross, R., and I. Finkelstein. 2008. Subsistence practices in an arid
environment: a geoarchaeological investigation in an Iron Age site, the Negev
Highlands, Israel. Journal of Archaeological Science 35(4):965–982.
Shahack-Gross, Ruth. 2011. Herbivorous livestock dung: formation, taphonomy, methods for identiﬁcation, and archaeological signiﬁcance. Journal of
Archaeological Science 38(2):205–218.
Sherwood, Sarah C., and Jefferson Chapman. 2005. The identiﬁcation and potential signiﬁcance of Early Holocene prepared clay surfaces: examples from
Dust Cave and Icehouse Bottom. Southeastern Archaeology 24(1):70–82.
Sievers, C., and L. Wadley. 2008. Going underground: experimental carbonization of fruiting structures under hearths. Journal of Archaeological Science 35(11):2909–2917.
Simpson, Ian A., Orri Vésteinsson, W. Paul Adderley, and Thomas H. McGovern. 2003. Fuel resource utilisation in landscapes of settlement. Journal
of Archaeological Science 30(11):1401–1420.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Aldeias

Fire Experiments

Stahlschmidt, Mareike C., Christopher E. Miller, Bertrand Ligouis, Ulrich
Hambach, Paul Goldberg, Francesco Berna, Daniel Richter, Brigitte Urban,
Jordi Serangeli, and Nicholas J. Conard. 2015. On the evidence for human
use and control of ﬁre at Schöningen. Journal of Human Evolution 89:181–
201.
Stiner, M. C., S. L. Kuhn, S. Weiner, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1995. Differential
burning, recrystallization, and fragmentation of archaeological bone. Journal
of Archaeological Science 22(2):223–237.
Théry, I., J. Gril, J. L. Vernet, L. Meignen, and J. Maury. 1996. Coal used for
fuel at two prehistoric sites in southern France: Les Canalettes (Mousterian)
and Les Usclades (Mesolithic). Journal of Archaeological Science 23(4):509–
512.
Théry-Parisot, I., L. Chabal, and J. Chrzavzez. 2010. Anthracology and taphonomy, from wood gathering to charcoal analysis: a review of the taphonomic processes modifying charcoal assemblages, in archaeological contexts. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 291(1/2):142–153.
Théry-Parisot, I., and A. Henry. 2012. Seasoned or green? radial cracks analysis
as a method for identifying the use of green wood as fuel in archaeological
charcoal. Journal of Archaeological Science 39(2):381–388.
Théry-Parisot, Isabelle. 2001. Economie des combustibles au paléolithique:
expérimentation, taphonomie, anthracologie. Paris: CNRS.
———. 2002a. Fuel management (bone and wood) during the lower Aurignacian in the Pataud rock shelter (Lower Palaeolithic, Les Eyzies de Tayac,
Dordogne, France): contribution of experimentation. Journal of Archaeological Science 29(12):1415–1421.
———. 2002b. Gathering of ﬁrewood during the Palaeolithic. Bar International Series 1063:243–250.
Théry-Parisot, Isabelle, and Sandrine Costamagno. 2005. Propriétés combustibles des ossements. Gallia Préhistoire 47:235–254.
Théry-Parisot, Isabelle, Sandrine Costamagno, Jean-Philip Brugal, Philippe
Fosse, and Raphaële Guilbert. 2005. The use of bone as fuel during the
Palaeolithic: experimental study of bone combustible properties. In The
zooarchaeology of fats, oils, milk, and dairying. J. Mulville and A. Outram,
eds. Oxford: Oxbow.
Toffolo, Michael B., and Elisabetta Boaretto. 2014. Nucleation of aragonite
upon carbonation of calcium oxide and calcium hydroxide at ambient
temperatures and pressures: a new indicator of ﬁre-related human activities. Journal of Archaeological Science 49:237–248.
Tsartsidou, G., S. Lev-Yadun, R. M. Albert, A. Miller-Rosen, N. Efstratiou,
and S. Weiner. 2007. The phytolith archaeological record: strengths and

S205
weaknesses evaluated based on a quantitative modern reference collection
from Greece. Journal of Archaeological Science 34(8):1262–1275.
Twomey, T. 2013. The cognitive implications of controlled ﬁre use by early
humans. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 23(1):113–128.
Villa, Paola, Francois Bon, and J. C. Castel. 2002. Fuel, ﬁre and ﬁreplaces in
the Palaeolithic of western Europe. Review of Archaeology 23(1):33–42.
Wadley, L. 2009. Post-depositional heating may cause over-representation of
red-coloured ochre in stone age sites. South African Archaeological Bulletin
64(190):166–171.
Wattez, J., and M. A. Courty. 1987. Morphology of ash of some plant materials.
Soil Micromorphology. N. Fedoroff, L. M. Bresson, and M. A. Courty, eds.
Pp. 677–683. Plasir: Association française pour l’étude du sol.
Wattez, Julia. 1996. Modes de formation des structures de combustión: approche méthodologique et implications archéologique. In The Lower and
Middle Palaeolithic. Ofer Bar-Yosef, ed. Forlì: A.B.A.C.O.
Weiner, S. 2010. Microarchaeology beyond the visible archaeological record.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weiner, S., P. Goldberg, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1993. Bone Preservation in Kebara
Cave, Israel using on-site Fourier transform infrared spectrometry. Journal
of Archaeological Science 20(6):613–627.
———. 2002. Three-dimensional distribution of minerals in the sediments of
Hayonim Cave, Israel: diagenetic processes and archaeological implications.
Journal of Archaeological Science 29(11):1289–1308.
Weiner, S., Q. Xu, P. Goldberg, J. Liu, and O. Bar-Yosef. 1998. Evidence for
the use of ﬁre at Zhoukoudian, China. Science 281(5374):251–253.
Weiner, Steve, Vlad Brumfeld, Ofer Marder, and Omry Barzilai. 2015. Heating
of ﬂint debitage from Upper Palaeolithic contexts at Manot Cave, Israel:
changes in atomic organization due to heating using infrared spectroscopy.
Journal of Archaeological Science 54:45–53.
Werts, S. P., and A. H. Jahren. 2007. Estimation of temperatures beneath archaeological campﬁres using carbon stable isotope composition of soil organic matter. Journal of Archaeological Science 34(6):850–857.
Wrangham, Richard W. 2006. The cooking enigma. In Evolution of the human diet: the known, the unknown, and the unknowable. Peter S. Ungar, ed.
Pp. 308–323. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2017. Control of ﬁre in the Paleolithic: evaluating the cooking hypothesis. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S303–S313.
Yravedra, J., and P. Uzquiano. 2013. Burnt bone assemblages from El Esquilleu
Cave (Cantabria, Northern Spain): deliberate use for fuel or systematic disposal of organic waste? Quaternary Science Reviews 68:175–190.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 07:03:34 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

