Current Anthropology

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

S303

Control of Fire in the Paleolithic
Evaluating the Cooking Hypothesis
by Richard Wrangham
According to current evidence, Homo sapiens was unable to survive on a diet of raw wild foods. Because cooked diets
have large physiological and behavioral consequences, a critical question for understanding human evolution is when
the adaptive obligation to use ﬁre developed. Archaeological evidence of ﬁre use is scarce before ca. 400 ka, which
suggests to some that the commitment to ﬁre must have arisen in the mid-Pleistocene or later. However, weak jaws and
small teeth make all proposals for a raw diet of early Pleistocene Homo problematic. Furthermore, the mid-Pleistocene
anatomical changes seem too small to explain the substantial effect expected from the development of cooking. Here I
explore these and other problems. At the present time no solution is satisfactory, but this does not mean the problem
should be ignored.

In this paper I consider the current status of the cooking hypothesis. I use “cooking” to mean the processing of food with
heat. The cooking hypothesis posits that control of ﬁre leads to
such a large increase in energy acquisition and reduces the physical challenges of eating food so greatly that the evolution of an
obligation to incorporate cooked food into the diet should be
recognizable by evidence of novel digestive adaptations and
increased energy use. It also claims that the only time in the
fossil record when the appropriate changes are seen is the early
Lower Paleolithic (Parker et al. 2016; Wrangham 2006; Wrangham and Carmody 2010; Wrangham et al. 1999).
The evidence for Lower Paleolithic control of ﬁre has been
increasing in the last decade (Alperson-Aﬁl 2008; Berna et al.
2012; Bosinski 2006; Walker et al. 2016). Nevertheless, numerous archaeological sites before the Upper Paleolithic challenge the cooking hypothesis because they ﬁnd no evidence for
the control of ﬁre. European Lower Paleolithic sites such as
Dmanisi, Atapuerca, La Caune d’Arago, and Boxgrove represent in total a screening of thousands of unburned bones but
no burned bones (Gowlett and Wrangham 2013). Even in the
Middle Paleolithic many Neanderthal sites have no ﬁre evidence (Sandgathe et al. 2011a, 2011b). Outside Europe, the few
cases where preservation conditions allow long sequences also
offer puzzles. Tabun and Qesem caves lie near the Mediterranean coast about 100 km apart. In Tabun, cave ﬁre use was
“regular or habitual” by 350–320 ka, but burned ﬂints were
scarce or absent during at least 50 ka of prior occupations (Shi-

Richard Wrangham is Professor in the Department of Human Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University (11 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA [wrangham@fas.harvard.edu]). This
paper was submitted 25 VII 16, accepted 5 III 17, and electronically
published 25 V 17.

melmitz et al. 2014). In Qesem, by contrast, the evidence of ﬁre
use is impressive back to 420 ka (Barkai et al. 2017).
One interpretation of such cases is that absence of evidence
really is evidence of absence. The implication is that populations of Homo occupied Europe during the Lower Paleolithic
and later without the systematic control of ﬁre, surviving on
raw food for hundreds of thousands of years (Roebroeks and
Villa 2011; Shimelmitz et al. 2014). Alternatively, the archaeological visibility of ﬁre may vary too much to allow the history
of its control to be conﬁdently reconstructed. For example, Boxgrove was a damp shoreline site that might have been unsuitable for locating ﬁre. Changes in the style of ﬁre use over
time could have biased preservation. Middle Paleolithic ﬁre
sites might have been larger, or more permanent, or sited more
often in caves than in earlier times (Gowlett and Wrangham
2013). For these reasons the debate over the meaning of Homo
sites that lack any evidence of ﬁre is unresolved, and I will not
discuss it here.
I consider instead some conceptual and empirical challenges
arising from the assumption that cooked food did not become
obligatory until the mid-Pleistocene. The evolution of Homo
erectus is often discussed without mentioning the control of
ﬁre (e.g., Antón and Snodgrass 2012; Hardy 2009; Isler and
van Schaik 2012; Potts 2012). The implication is that either a
later time can be conﬁdently found for the origin of obligatory
ﬁre use, or ﬁre control has only small effects on human adaptation, or both. But those implications are rarely considered
carefully. I suggest that they are wrong.
Here, therefore, I assess the difﬁculty of understanding a
date later than the origin of H. erectus for when cooking might
have become obligatory. In the ﬁrst section I review the current
status of the cooking hypothesis. I then consider some difﬁculties that follow from the assumption that H. erectus could not
cook. Finally, I consider problems for the cooking hypothesis.

q 2017 by The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. 0011-3204/2017/58S16-0013$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/692113

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S304

Current Anthropology

Current Status of the Cooking Hypothesis
Adaptation to Cooked Diets
The cooking hypothesis starts with the claim that unlike other
animals, Homo sapiens has evolved an obligation to include
cooked food in the diet such that we cannot live without it. The
idea has been intimated for at least half a century (Brace 1995;
Coon 1962; Symons 1998) and directly supported more recently (Wrangham and Conklin-Brittain 2003).
Key evidence comes from research on raw foodists, that is,
people who live for long periods on all-raw diets. Raw-foodist
groups typically live in industrial societies on store-bought
foods. Even though raw foodists take little exercise compared
with hunter-gatherers and have fewer disease challenges, on
average they experience chronic energy shortage leading to low
body mass index (BMI). In the only study of reproductive
performance, incompetent or absent ovulation left more than
50% of women on an all-raw diet unable to reproduce (Koebnick et al. 1999).
These physiological detriments are striking because the diet
eaten by raw foodists is extremely high quality compared with
any known hunter-gatherer diet (if their diet were eaten raw).
Most of the raw foodists’ diet is rich in digestible energy and
low in structural ﬁber because it comes from domesticated species. Furthermore, raw foodists typically process the food extensively by nonthermal means (such as by blending) and (in
spite of their supposed adherence to raw) often use heat to
lightly cook (up to around 1147F). In addition, raw foodists experience no important seasonal energy shortages (because they
buy from globally connected markets; Wrangham 2009).
Low meat intake does not account for the problems faced by
raw foodists. No relationship has been found for raw foodists
between BMI and the amount of meat eaten (Koebnick et al.
1999). Unlike meat-eating raw foodists, vegetarians eating
cooked diets thrive. They have high BMI and excellent ovarian
function (Barr 1999; Rosell, Appleby, and Key 2005). Cooking
is thus more important than meat for human welfare.
On the basis of contemporary evidence, dogs (Canis familiaris) are the only nonhuman species that might be adapted to
cooked food given that their pancreatic amylases are adapted
to a high-starch diet (Axelsson et al. 2013; Reiter, Jagoda, and
Capellini 2016). However, it is unknown whether the relationship between dogs and cooked food is obligatory. Possibly dogs
are merely able to take advantage of a cooked diet and can survive without it if needed (as dingoes [Canis dingo] do; Whitehouse 1977). So with the possible exception of some domesticated species, H. sapiens is unique among living species by being
evolutionarily restricted to diets that contain a substantial proportion of cooked food (Wrangham and Carmody 2010).

How Does Cooked Food Beneﬁt Consumer Physiology?
Evidence of BMI reduction and reproductive problems among
raw foodists indicates that cooked food provides higher net
energy gain than raw food. Feeding experiments with mice

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

support this prediction for all three major macronutrients, that
is, long-chain carbohydrates, proteins, and (plant) lipids (Carmody, Weintraub, and Wrangham 2011; Groopman, Carmody,
and Wrangham 2015). On raw diets (sweet potato tuber, meat,
or peanuts) mice typically lose weight, whereas on cooked diets
they maintain weight.
One reason is that digestibility is increased. With regard to
starch, ileostomy experiments with ﬁve domesticated plants
(oat, wheat, plantain, green banana, potato) eaten by humans
indicate that cooking raises starch digestibility in the small
intestine by amounts that vary across foods from 28% to 109%.
On the conventional assumption that because of fermentation
by the microbiome, 50% of starch energy is recovered from the
colon, the median increase in net energy gained is 30.2% (Carmody and Wrangham 2009).
Schnorr et al. (2015) and Henry (2017) noted that the effects
of cooking in human evolution are best studied in wild plants
roasted on open ﬁres rather than in domesticated plants
cooked with contemporary methods. They assessed the energetic effect of brief roasting times (average 8.7 min) on four
species of tuber eaten by Hadza. Three of the species were
normally cooked, and one was normally eaten raw. Schnorr
et al. (2015) found that such cooking led to much variation in
the in vitro starch digestibility both within and between species. In two species, cooking led to a 10% increase in glucose
availability, whereas in the species typically eaten raw (Ipomoea transvaalensis), glucose absorption fell after roasting.
Schnorr et al. (2015) concluded that starch gelatinization is not
necessarily a route by which cooking increases net energy gain.
Instead, after ﬁnding that brief periods of roasting made tubers much easier to chew, they suggested that cooking could
increase net energy gain by making chewing more efﬁcient.
Cooking also makes tubers easier to peel, which Henry (2017)
suggested was its main beneﬁt. Such experiments are promising, but as Schnorr et al. (2015) noted, they are at an early
stage because they have considered only glucose, they have not
taken account of variation in quality within food species, and
they rely on in vitro measures of digestibility.
Other energy beneﬁts of cooking have been less well quantiﬁed. They include a reduced cost of digestion (snakes: Boback et al. 2007; rats: Carmody 2012), shorter and less vigorous
chewing times (humans: Zink, Lieberman, and Lukas 2014),
increased chewing efﬁciency (Dominy et al. 2008), and reduced
investment in immune defenses when meat is eaten (Carmody
and Wrangham 2009; Carmody et al. 2016). In addition, cooked
food is more quickly digested than raw food, which means that
if extra food is available, the total rate of energy acquisition per
day can be higher.
In the case of plant lipids, a principal mechanism by which
cooking increases digestibility concerns the common way in
which they are stored in oilseeds. Oilseed lipids are stored in oil
bodies surrounded by proteins called oleosins that present a
hydrophobic interior surface and a hydrophilic exterior. Cooking denatures the oleosins and thereby makes the lipids available for faster digestion (Groopman, Carmody, and Wrangham
2015).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Wrangham

The Cooking Hypothesis

No tests of the effects of cooking on energy gain have yet
been conducted with animal lipids, which are mostly stored as
droplets inside adipocytes or other cells. The lipid droplets of
vertebrates and insects are coated with proteins of the perilipin
family (Arrese and Soulages 2010; Brasaemle 2007). The effect
of heat on denaturation of perilipins appears to be unknown.
The physical effect of heating solid fats to liquid forms or thin
layers could be important in promoting release of lipids from
adipocytes. Furthermore, the thinning of fats into oils could
facilitate more rapid digestion given that digestive lipases are
active only at oil-water interfaces, where they depend for their
effectiveness on lipids presenting a high surface area (Lentle
and Janssen 2011). How much such effects matter is unknown.
There are numerous ethnographic reports of eating raw animal fat (Ben-Dor, Gopher, and Barkai 2016). Variation in fat
type could be important. It might be more beneﬁcial to cook
lipids that have high melting points.
The uncertainty about effects on animal-sourced lipids as
well as limited experimental study for all macronutrients mean
that the energetic effect of cooking is not well quantiﬁed.
Progress in solving this problem will be slowed by numerous
sources of variation, including the physical states of the diet,
such as whether it is eaten cold or hot, blended or whole, mixed
or pure, and fresh or fermented. However, even though the
energy gain from eating food cooked is poorly known, there
are clear indications that the amount is large enough to have
major ﬁtness consequences. The ﬁgure of 30.2% increase for
starch may well be on the low side because it is derived solely
from considering digestibility, excluding reduced costs of digestion, increased food safety, and reduced time digesting.
Effects of cooking a starch-rich food appear broadly similar to
those for cooking protein-rich food (meat) and lipid-rich food
(nuts; Groopman, Carmody, and Wrangham 2015). Thus, a
30% gain in energy seems a reasonable starting point for considering the effect of cooking.
Much smaller increases in energy have large ﬁtness effects in
the wild. When chimpanzees of the Kanyawara community in
Kibale National Park, Uganda, were able to eat 5% more fruit
in their diet than usual (thanks to improved fruit availability),
they experienced a 4-month reduction in waiting time to conception (Emery Thompson and Wrangham 2008). Numerous
similar examples in large nonhuman primates indicate that even
modest increases in net energy gain have substantial positive
effects on ﬁtness. The estimated 30% increase in calorie gain is
therefore comparatively massive. It is also exceptional because
compared with many changes in diet (e.g., addition of fat-rich
meat), it works both during periods of food scarcity and during
periods of abundance.
Could Homo sapiens Live without Cooked Food in the Wild?
No human populations are known to live without cooking, but
might it be possible? Luke Glowacki (personal communication)
observed that unmarried Nyangatom men in cattle camps in
southwestern Ethiopia sometimes spend several weeks or a few
months living solely on raw blood and milk. While this diet

S305

leaves the men thin, it raises the question of whether African
populations of H. sapiens might have been able to survive on a
diet that was sufﬁciently focused on equivalently fat-rich and
easily chewed raw wild foods, such as oilseeds, marrow, brains,
or guts.
In African habitats, seasonal variation is a problem for both
oilseeds and marrow (Speth 2010). Oilseeds can be vanishingly
scarce, while the fat content of herbivore marrow declines
from more than 90% dry weight at the best time of year to 2%–
3% at the worst (late dry and early wet seasons; Dunham and
Murray 1982; Lupo 1998). So oilseeds and marrow are unreliable year-round sources of energy (Speth 2010).
However, brain fats are never depleted, remaining around
50%–60% dry weight all year (Carlson and Kingston 2007;
Stiner 1994). So conceivably a sufﬁcient abundance of brains
could give modern humans the basis for surviving as wild raw
foodists during food-scarce seasons. How much brain would
be required is, therefore, an interesting question. If the diet
needs to be ∼50% fat (i.e., for an animal-based diet; Speth
2010), and brains are roughly 50% fat, then a near-exclusive
diet of brains might be predicted. Availability of other foods
rich in fats or easily digested carbohydrates would lessen the
reliance on brains.
Intestines, especially of ungulates, could also represent an
important item of diet partly because semidigested chyme would
provide an easily accessed source of energy. Furthermore, they
are readily eaten by Hadza (Buck et al. 2016).
In sum, there is no evidence of modern H. sapiens populations surviving on raw foods, but possible diets allowing earlier
H. sapiens to have lived without ﬁre require easily chewed and
fat-rich foods, of which brains and guts are the most plausible.
But these scenarios are speculative. Despite cooking their main
meals, even well-adapted Arctic populations living on high-fat
diets suffer extreme food shortages (Balikci 1989; Hardy et al.
2015). It is doubtful that they would survive if they were forced
to eat all their food raw.
Why Does Homo sapiens Find It So Difﬁcult to Thrive
on Raw Foods?
The inferred inability of H. sapiens to survive on raw wild diets
is explicable by a series of adaptations that have apparently
promoted efﬁciency in processing easily digested foods at the
expense of being able to process relatively indigestible foods.
The best-known adaptations are the diminution of the human
mouth, jaw muscles, jaw, incisors, molars, stomach, cecum, and
colon compared with those of nonhuman primates (Martin
et al. 1985; Perry et al. 2015; Ungar 2012; Wrangham 2009).
Overall, Aiello and Wheeler (1995) estimated that the human
gut is 60% of the expected size for a primate. Note that Hladik,
Chivers, and Pasquet (1999) presented data to claim that the
human gut was the same size as expected in a nonhuman primate of the same body size. However, their data were solely for
absorptive mucosa, that is, the small intestine. In humans the
small intestine is indeed the size expected by body mass, whereas
the big reductions are in the cecum and colon (Martin et al.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S306

Current Anthropology

1985). These reductions appear to be responsible for humans
having a relatively small intake of dry weight of food per day
compared with nonhuman primates (Barton 1992) and being
relatively poor at digesting long-chain carbohydrates (Milton
and Demment 1988). Presumably the reductions could not have
evolved until consumers had consistent (year-long) access to
appropriately calorie-dense, easily chewed, and easily digested
foods.
Numerous parallel adaptations to cooked food can be expected in physiological traits, such as in digestive enzymes. A
leading candidate is the amylase system, which has been putatively associated with increased consumption of starch (Perry
et al. 2007), speciﬁcally cooked starch (Hardy et al. 2015). Compared with chimpanzees and bonobos, humans have been found
to have a three or more times increase in copy number of the
salivary amylase gene AMY1, which appears responsible for
levels of salivary amylase protein being at least three times as
high as in Pan (Perry et al. 2007). No increase in salivary amylase copy number compared with Pan was found for Neanderthals or Denisovans (Perry et al. 2015). In theory this could
mean that adaptation to cooked diets occurred in the Homo
lineage after the splits from Neanderthals and Denisovans.
However, only one individual has been characterized for each
of the latter species, and it is not known whether duplication of
amylase is associated with increased starch consumption (Carpenter et al. 2015). Even if it were, whether the amylase difference between Pan and H. sapiens is associated with cooking
or only with an increase in the starch component of the diet is
unknown (Perry et al. 2015). More information is therefore
needed to make the amylase system informative about the
prehistory of cooking.
A different approach to investigating physiological adaptations to cooking uses gene expression. Carmody et al. (2016)
found that genes expressed in the livers of mice eating cooked
food have been under positive selection in H. sapiens, Neanderthals, and Denisovans. The cooking-related genes were associated with lipid-related metabolic processes on meat diets
and with carbohydrate-metabolic processes on tuber diets. While
this research has not identiﬁed a speciﬁc cooking-related phenotype, it suggests that human adaptation to a cooked diet occurred before the evolution of Neanderthals and Denisovans,
that is, before 550–765 ka (Prüfer et al. 2014). However, similar
cautions apply as to the amylase studies.
The question arises as to why Neanderthals would have had
“cooking genes” given evidence that they sometimes lived
without using ﬁre (Henry 2017). One possibility is that Neanderthals cooked sufﬁciently often to maintain their genetic adaptation. Another is that the genes were retained from a cookingdependent ancestor despite a low frequency of cooking.

What Diet Type Shaped the Digestive Anatomy
of Homo erectus?
The evidence of predictable high-energy gain from eating
cooked food is helpful because the evolution of H. erectus was

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

marked by an increase in total energy expenditure (e.g., Antón
and Snodgrass 2012). Importantly, there is no subsequent time
in human evolution when a marked increase in energy use has
been suggested. Because cooking is strongly associated with an
increase in energy gain, it is therefore predicted to have been
adopted by H. erectus (Wrangham 2006). Paleoanthropologists routinely attribute increased energy use by H. erectus to
increased reliance on animal-sourced foods (e.g., Zink and Lieberman 2016). However, contemporary evidence indicates that
cooking has a much greater effect on energy gain than meat as
shown by the robust performance of vegetarians eating cooked
food compared with meat-eating raw foodists (see “Adaptation to Cooked Diets”).
Changes in H. erectus anatomy are critical for reconstructing diet. Homo erectus digestive anatomy is known from teeth
and jaws and inferred from rib cage and pelvis. Homo erectus
incisors and molars were markedly smaller than in Homo
habilis, especially the third molar (Ungar 2012). Their jaws
were similar in absolute size to H. habilis (Antón and Snodgrass 2012), which means that in relation to body mass, the jaw
of H. erectus was relatively small (Wood and Collard 1999;
body mass estimates: australopithecines 36–44 kg, H. habilis
34 kg, H. erectus 57 kg).
Aiello and Wheeler (1995) proposed that H. erectus also
experienced a major reduction in the size of the gut based on a
reconstruction by Schmid (1983) of the rib cage of H. erectus as
being barrel shaped compared with more bell shaped in australopithecines and living great apes: the ﬂared shape is thought
to allow a large intestinal capacity below the ribs. In addition,
the pelvis was seen as relatively narrow compared with earlier
hominins, suggesting a small intestinal ﬂoor supporting what
was therefore considered to be a relatively small gut compared
with previous species. These points supported the idea that H.
erectus acquired a small gut at about the same time as getting
smaller teeth, mouth, and jaws.
However, subsequent analysis has changed the reconstruction of the H. erectus pelvis because H. sapiens now appears to
be the only species of Homo with a reduced pelvis compared
with australopithecines (Holliday 2012). This means either
that the size of the pelvis is less informative about the volume
of the gut than Aiello and Wheeler (1995) suggested or that the
Homo gut remained large until the evolution of H. sapiens. For
the moment I assume the former conclusion, that is, the pelvis
is not well correlated with gut size (see “There May Have Been
Important Variation in Gut Size within Post-Habiline Homo”).
The idea that these changes to the jaws, teeth, and guts were
the result of a dietary improvement is universal, and the leading candidate diet has long been increased animal-sourced foods,
especially high-fat meat and marrow. However, the animalfood idea faces a major difﬁculty. Dietary adaptations must be
relevant not only to preferred foods but also to fallback foods,
that is, those eaten during periods of food scarcity. Such fallback periods occur frequently, approximately every year, regardless of habitat: they are found even in rainforests for great
apes (Marshall and Wrangham 2007) and are well documented
for African dry-country hunter-gatherers (Speth 2010).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Wrangham

The Cooking Hypothesis

So the difﬁculty is to understand what an importantly carnivorous H. erectus would have eaten during the inevitable
periods when animal products were inadequate. Presumably
H. erectus incorporated some plant matter in their diets just
as recent hunter-gatherers do. But unlike hunter-gatherers, if
H. erectus did not control ﬁre, they would have had to eat their
plants raw. Because neither molars nor guts indicate an ability
for H. erectus to utilize raw plants high in structural ﬁber, this
makes no sense. Either a solution must be found to this problem or H. erectus had to cook. Two noncooking solutions are
worth considering.
First, the reduced digestive system could have been made
possible by a commitment to fat eating as implied by Ben-Dor,
Gopher, and Barkai (2011). As discussed for H. sapiens, prey
brains would have been one of the few sources of fat in fallback
seasons for H. erectus. This hypothesis should eventually be
testable by the fossil record.
Second, H. erectus might have physically processed plants
(probably underground or underwater storage organs [USOs])
before consumption in ways that allowed teeth to be functional
despite being small and that allowed fermentation to occur
without a large colon. Zink et al. (2014) and Zink and Lieberman (2016) proposed this scenario after showing that mechanical tenderization decreased the toughness of tubers by 42%.
Against the proposed importance of physical processing,
however, mechanical tenderization has limited beneﬁts to
judge from the fact that raw foodists suffer energy deﬁciencies
despite using electrical blenders to produce smoothies. Furthermore, no ethnographic or primate models seem to be
known of physically processing a food for consumption raw.
Contemporary foragers sometimes use techniques such as hammering (to extract an edible seed), but the seed itself is not
smashed unless it is going to be cooked. These arguments
mean that H. erectus was unlikely to have been able to live off
raw plant foods even if they were mashed. Accordingly, even if
H. erectus had an ape-sized gut, the puzzle remains of why
teeth, jaws, jaw muscles, and mouth size became reduced.
Did Homo erectus Have the Cognitive Ability to Cook?
Warneken and Rosati (2015) have shown that chimpanzees
have the cognitive ability to understand the transformative effects of cooking and sufﬁcient inhibition to carry food to a
cooker rather than eat it unripe. This indicates that H. erectus,
with a presumably greater understanding of cause-effect relationships and more inhibitory ability, was plausibly able to
cook.
Use of Honey
The symbiotic relationship between humans and the greater
honeyguide bird (Indicator indicator) has been proposed to
depend on a long evolutionary history of controlling ﬁre (Crittenden 2011; Marlowe et al. 2014; Wrangham 2011). Honeyguides are genetically adapted to leading humans toward Apis
mellifera beehives, from which humans extract honeycomb.

S307

Humans beneﬁt by ﬁnding honey more quickly, while honeyguides beneﬁt by feeding on otherwise unattainable products
(Spottiswoode, Begg, and Begg 2016). African hunter-gatherers
use smoke to quell the bees’ defensive response, suggesting an
ancient control of ﬁre. However, this proposal has been weakened by Kraft and Venkatamaran’s (2015) ﬁnding that some
populations of honey collectors use plant volatiles rather than
smoke to control bees. So collecting Apis honey in the Paleolithic might not have depended on controlling ﬁre.

Problems in Understanding Adaptations of Homo
erectus If They Were Limited to Raw Food
Scavenging on Raw Food Would Be Difﬁcult Except
for Marrow or Brains
Eating of meat and marrow is evidenced back to 2.5 million
years ago (de Heinzelin et al. 1999) and arguably to 3.3 million
years ago (McPherron et al. 2010; but see Domínguez-Rodrigo
and Alcalá 2016). However, only by 1.8 million years ago do
hominin sites indicate regular butchering of large animals
(Potts 2012). This suggests that H. erectus was the ﬁrst species
to rely extensively on access to animal foods and raises the
question of how they escaped a high risk of disease from pathogens (Ragir, Rosenberg, and Tierno 2000). One answer would
be a focus on eating marrow, which has a low bacterial load as a
result of being protected inside bone (Smith et al. 2015). Brains
are probably similarly safe.
Nevertheless, cut marks show that edible meat portions were
also commonly removed. Careful attention paid by the butchers to identifying dangerously infected sections of meat would
have helped reduce the dangers of eating raw wild meat, but
cooking would still have been a safer strategy (Smith et al.
2015).

Hunting Effort Would Be Mysterious (Time Would
Be Constrained If Food Is Raw)
Although exploitation of meat and marrow can lead to high
gains, nowadays those foods are not dependable as a source of
calories for tropical hunter-gatherers because the amount of
animal food obtained on any given day is often inadequate
(Speth 2010). This suggests that the same would have been true
in the Lower Paleolithic. Accordingly, individuals who invested
in trying to hunt or ﬁnd carcasses would sometimes fail and
would therefore need to have an alternative source of food that
day. The problem is easily solved in modern humans: when an
entire group runs short of animal products, they are able to eat
starchy plant foods that are consumable quickly because they
have been cooked. Plant foods are generally less satisfying than
animal foods, but their merit is that they are more easily obtained and are, therefore, relatively predictable. However, the
value of plant foods depends on their being cooked not only
because cooked plants provide more energy than raw plants
but also because they can be eaten much faster (perhaps in
10%–20% of the time needed for raw plants; Organ et al. 2011).

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S308

Current Anthropology

Without access to cooked food, failed hunters would need
many hours to chew and digest plant foods that would provide
their daily energy requirements. This means that a signiﬁcant
increase in the amount of meat eaten, as occurred most clearly
with H. erectus, depended on having cooked food as a substitute food resource on days when no animal-source foods
were obtained (Wrangham 2009).
Brain Size Increase in Homo erectus Would Be
Challenging to Understand
Aiello and Wheeler (1995) recognized two major rises in human brain size (cf. Rightmire 2004). The ﬁrst was around
2 million years ago, including H. habilis/rudolfensis and H. ergaster, which they attributed to increased meat eating. The second was in the latter half of the Middle Pleistocene. They suggested that cooked food could have been an important factor
in the second rise.
If the mid-Pleistocene increase in cranial capacity was due
to hominin exploitation of cooked food, the fact that cooked
food increases energy gain by 30% or more should be recognizable in other changes as well. But in the mid-Pleistocene
there are no other signiﬁcant signals of improved dietary quality or any marked decline in tooth size that would be expected
to accompany an increasingly tender diet produced by cooking.
This makes the idea of cooked food being introduced at that
time problematic.
Fonseca-Azevedo and Herculano-Houzel (2012) drew attention to a second difﬁculty by postulating that the positive
inﬂuence of cooked food on brain size was not achieved until
the mid-Pleistocene (i.e., with Homo heidelbergensis). Based on
extrapolation from living primates, they calculated the metabolic cost of servicing bodies and brains of hominin species.
Noting that a combination of large body and large brain is a
difﬁcult challenge because of the high maintenance costs of
both, they found that if H. erectus ate only raw food, they
would be required to chew for as many hours per day as a
gorilla, that is, up to 8 hours or more. Their calculation seems
to be an underestimate because it assumes that digestive effectiveness was as high in H. erectus as in gorillas, which is
unlikely given the smaller teeth (and possibly smaller gut) of
H. erectus. The demand of exceptionally high foraging time
(which would necessarily be associated with high resting time
to allow digestion to occur) appears to be impossible for a
species that supposedly had high travel distances (cf. Organ
et al. 2011).
Fonseca-Azevedo and Herculano-Houzel (2012) concluded
that H. erectus and subsequent species needed to eat cooked
food in order to obtain enough calories per day to satisfy the
combination of larger bodies and larger brains without spending all day chewing.
The major alternative is that Homo (starting presumably
with H. habilis) fueled their larger brains thanks to a diet that
included more raw meat and fat products of animals than
before (Leonard, Snodgrass, and Robertson 2007). This is prem-

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

ised on animal foods being more energetically efﬁcient than
plant foods. In favor of this explanation, among carnivores a
diet richer in vertebrate animals is correlated with increased
relative brain size (Swanson et al. 2012). Against it, allometric
variation in carnivore brain size is explained principally by
between-family differences (Finarelli and Flynn 2009). Within
families, the most striking variation in eating vertebrates is
found in the Ursidae, from the vegetarian giant panda Ailuropoda melanoleuca to the vertebrate-eating polar bear Ursus
maritimus. If meat products are important for brain growth,
polar bears should have relatively large brains. But although
larger bear species eat more vertebrates, the slope of brain
volume on body mass is the same in bears as in basal Carnivora.
So bears have larger brains than other carnivores without any
evidence that a diet incorporating more meat inﬂuences this
relationship (Finarelli and Flynn 2009).
If cooked food explains the rise in brain size in H. erectus,
what explains the later, mid-Pleistocene grade shift in brain
size (Rightmire 2004)? One possibility is that developments in
hunting ability led to increased procurement of fat-rich prime
adults compared with weakened, fat-depleted prey (Stiner, Barkai, and Gopher 2009). The interesting problem that remains
is how sufﬁcient dietary fat could be maintained during seasons of food scarcity.
Running Would Not Be Favored without the Use of Fire
Endurance running is a unique human ability compared with
other primates. Bramble and Lieberman (2004) argue that it is
made possible by various anatomical adaptations in H. sapiens
that occur also in H. erectus but not earlier, including features
that promote stabilization of head and trunk and energy storage and shock absorption in the foot. Their proposals have
been criticized on the basis that australopithecines may have
had the same adaptations, allowing them to be equally effective
endurance runners (Pontzer 2012).
Physiological adaptations for endurance running include
increased ability to lose heat compared with apes, such as longer
legs in relation to body mass (Pontzer 2012). Loss of body hair
would make a particularly important contribution to the ability to lose heat. In support of an early loss of body hair (and the
associated evolution of pubic hair), the human pubic louse
(Pthirus pubis) diverged an estimated 1.84–5.61 Ma from its
closest living relative, the gorilla louse (Pthirus gorillae; Reed
et al. 2007). However, a critical function of body hair is to
retain heat during sleep, which means that sufﬁcient reduction
of body hair to allow endurance running would seem to depend on a system of heat maintenance during sleep other than
an insulating layer of hair.
Clothes are one possibility, but parasite evidence indicates
clothes were adopted relatively late. Thus, clothing appears to
have been responsible for a functional split between head lice
and body lice (both Pediculus humanus), which are estimated
to have been genetically separated since 83–170 ka (Perry 2014),
long after the evidence for endurance running.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Wrangham

The Cooking Hypothesis

Other than clothing, the obvious way for a species with reduced body hair to keep warm at night is to use ﬁre (Wrangham 2009). This suggests that endurance running could not
have occurred without the loss of body hair made possible by
the control of ﬁre.
In sum, endurance running presumably depended on the
loss of an insulating layer of hair and, therefore, on noninsulated humans being able to warm themselves at night by
a ﬁre. The evidence for Lower Paleolithic endurance running
therefore suggests that ﬁre was controlled by then.
Sleeping on the Ground Would Not Be Favored
without the Use of Fire
The adaptations of H. erectus to terrestrial locomotion include
reduced climbing ability. Having an essentially modern frame
with long legs, H. erectus cannot be expected to have been able
to climb into trees every night to make a bed of leaves and twigs
in the way that most great apes do. They therefore presumably
slept on the ground (Coolidge and Wynn 2006). Gorillas regularly sleep on the ground, as do chimpanzees in some populations, but only where predators are not a serious risk (Koops
et al. 2007). Terrestrial sleeping for humans in a predator-rich
savanna, by contrast, can be expected to be very dangerous.
Even today people in lion-rich environments are most vulnerable to predation shortly after dark (Packer et al. 2011).
Accordingly, the reduction of climbing adaptations that occurred
with H. erectus appears to signal the simultaneous evolution of
a method of achieving safety at night. Control of ﬁre is the
obvious possibility because it is the principal method used by
modern humans sleeping in the kinds of habitats occupied by
H. erectus (Wrangham and Carmody 2010).
Shipman (2009) objected to this proposal by noting that
antelope sleep on the ground without ﬁre. However, antelope
sleep less than humans (Richard Estes, personal communication). Smaller species tend to hide at night, under bushes, for
example. Larger species avoid cover and prefer to be in the open.
Although no details are known about sleeping patterns of African ungulates, they certainly do not have long periods of relaxed sleep. Even domesticated ungulates sleep brieﬂy: according to Elgar et al. (1988, 1990), total sleep time per 24 hours is
less for artiodactyls (mean 5.3 h) and perissodactyls (4.8 h)
than in 10 other orders of mammals, including primates (10.3 h).
In relation to body mass, domesticated ungulates also have the
shortest cycle of REM sleep and slow-wave sleep of nine orders
of mammals, whereas primates have the longest. Short REM
cycles in ungulates ﬁt with the observation by Richard Estes
(personal communication) that wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus) sleep deeply for only a few minutes at a time. In general,
species in riskier environments have less REM sleep (Lesku
et al. 2006).
Thus, ungulates sleep little compared with humans, enabling them to be relatively vigilant, and they sprint faster.
Yet their mortality from predation is clearly much higher than
in humans. Among Kalahari foragers, data collected by Polly

S309

Wiessner indicated that predation risk on humans is sharply
higher when sleeping without ﬁre than when ﬁre is present
(Wrangham and Carmody 2010).
In short, the pattern of sleep by large herbivores is not an
argument against the claim that H. erectus would have been
very vulnerable if they slept on the ground unprotected by ﬁre
or some alternative system. The proposal that H. erectus did
not control ﬁre, therefore, demands a novel explanation of their
defenses at night, such as the evolution of an ungulate-like
pattern of sleep, a surprisingly good ability to sprint, or the
building of effective fences.

Problems for the Cooking Hypothesis
Why Were Population Densities So Low?
Cooking presumably increased both the range of foods that
could be eaten and the total energy gained from those foods.
Yet although Homo achieved a wide geographical distribution
around the time of H. erectus, it appears to have been a relatively unsuccessful genus in terms of its population densities
and total numbers, at least intermittently. Later, Neanderthals
were in small, widely dispersed groups, and H. sapiens experienced a severe bottleneck around 70,000 years ago. How do
we reconcile the beneﬁts of cooked food with the poor ecological success of Homo before agriculture?
One possibility is that by adapting to forego the ability to eat
ﬁber-rich foods (such as raw leaves, stems, and USOs), Homo
boxed themselves into requiring even higher-quality foods
than before. Such foods would be animal products and lowtoxin, low-lignin plants containing high concentrations of sugar
or starch. The acquisition of adaptations to take maximal advantage of cooked foods may thus have been a Faustian pact in
which the beneﬁt of high-quality foods was set against the loss
of ability to digest foods on which other hominoids (such as
chimpanzees and orangutans) can readily survive.

Why Was Homo habilis Intermediate?
There is increasing evidence that the evolution of H. erectus
was not a single “Adamic” event (Hublin 2015) but a “fuzzy
transition” occurring in a complex series of shifts (Antón, Potts,
and Aiello 2014; Antón and Snodgrass 2012). This means that
whatever the dietary change responsible for H. erectus, its effect
took time to be felt, and geographical variation suggests that the
process happened erratically in space. Thus, the conclusion that
H. erectus was the ﬁrst obligatory cook leads to the expectation
that species before H. erectus would not show indications of being adapted to cooked food. In line with this prediction, H. habilis has a similar postcanine crown size to Australopithecus
africanus and a similarly robust jaw in relation to body mass
(Eng et al. 2013; Wood and Collard 1999).
However, there are at least two problems that the cooking
hypothesis must deal with. First, based on one specimen (OH13),

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S310

Current Anthropology

Eng et al. (2013) modeled H. habilis as producing only a low
maximum bite force in line with later Homo and different from
the higher bite forces of Australopithecus (and contemporary
great apes). This result came from H. habilis having a relatively
small second molar. Eng el al. (2013) therefore suggested that
H. habilis might be adapted to foods that had been mechanically processed to reduce their toughness or other physical
challenges. In support, dental microwear studies indicate that
Australopithecus ate tougher foods than H. habilis (Ungar and
Scott 2009; Villmoare et al. 2015). Thus, a potential solution to
H. habilis having a craniofacial structure that is to some extent
intermediate between Australopithecus and subsequent Homo
is that a period of mechanical processing preceded cooking.
While this makes sense given that stone tools that could cut
and pound food were available long before Homo erectus, it
also raises the possibility that the reduced craniofacial robusticity of H. erectus reﬂects a continuation of the same process (Zink and Lieberman 2016). According to this idea, mechanical, nonthermal processing became even more important
and effective in H. erectus than in H. habilis and accounts for
the small teeth (a reduction of ca. 25% in size), shorter face,
and more lightly built jaw.
The second challenge has a similar implication of being able
to explain H. erectus biology on the basis of adaptations begun
in H. habilis. Before “Homo-ization” of the jaw and teeth, brain
size in H. habilis had risen from the australopithecine level
of 385–571 cc to 510–750 cc (Antón, Potts, and Aiello 2014;
Spoor et al. 2015). Whether this was due to increased animal
foods in the diet, nonthermal processing, or some other change,
the increase in diet quality that is indicated by the rising brain
size in H. habilis could have been continued and caused the
changes seen in H. erectus.
A solution offered by the cooking hypothesis is that before
the obligatory adaptation to cooking indicated for H. erectus,
H. habilis used ﬁre intermittently. As a result, they were able to
regularly eat relatively tender food (as indicated by microwear;
Ungar 2012) and gain sufﬁcient extra energy to promote an
increase in brain size. However, because they could not guarantee having access to cooked food, they retained dental and
digestive adaptations that allowed them to effectively chew
plant foods when animal foods were scarce.
Despite these problems for the idea of a single shift encompassing diverse features of Homo simultaneously, it is often concluded that habilines had a faster life history than
H. erectus (e.g., “non-erectus early Homo was smaller and developed more quickly than H. erectus”; Antón and Snodgrass
2012:S487). A slower life history could imply earlier weaning
and more dependence of juveniles on adults for food (Thompson and Nelson 2011). Early weaning is clearly hard to reconcile with a raw diet unless it predictably included such elusive foods as brain and fat-rich marrow. Unfortunately, although
these arguments are intriguing, they are premature given that
it remains unclear how different the life history of H. erectus
was from its antecedents (Schwartz 2012).

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

There May Have Been Important Variation in Gut Size
within Post-Habiline Homo
The idea that the inferred small gut size and observed small
molar size of H. erectus are only explicable by a cooked diet is
challenged by the observation that there is more difference in
gut size among species of Homo than previously appreciated.
This raises the possibility that the intestinal volume (including
the colon) could have been so much larger in earlier Homo
than in H. sapiens that H. erectus was capable of surviving on a
raw diet. How much larger can only be guessed, but the idea
raises the possibility that the colon was sufﬁciently large for
foods to be retained and well fermented. Ben-Dor, Gopher,
and Barkai (2016) have similarly suggested that the digestive
anatomy of Neanderthals differed signiﬁcantly from that of
H. sapiens by being relatively large. If this meant that they
were able to live on raw diets, the fact that some Neanderthal
sites were apparently occupied without ﬁre would be more
easily explicable (Sandgathe et al. 2011a, 2011b; Henry 2017).
An improved understanding of the relationship between trunk
morphology and digestive anatomy would be useful in establishing the potential for different species of Homo to exploit
different diets.
Biological Evidence for Late Adaptation to Fire
Several recent results challenge the prediction that ﬁre was
controlled by species as early as H. erectus. Chisholm et al.
(2016) concluded that the evolution of tuberculosis in Homo
was a consequence of living with ﬁre and that it likely happened between 6 ka and 70 ka. While analysis of dental calculus
shows evidence of smoke inhalation between 300 and 400 ka
at Qesem (Hardy et al. 2015), at Atapuerca at 1.2 Ma it indicates consumption of raw foods and a lack of exposure to ﬁre
(Hardy et al. 2016). Hubbard et al. (2016) found an allele conferring protection against smoke toxins in H. sapiens that was
absent in four Neanderthals and Denisovans, suggesting adaptation to ﬁre by at least 550 ka (Prüfer et al. 2014).

Closing Remarks
The cooking hypothesis is sometimes treated as if the fossil
evidence of an improved and more easily chewed diet at the
origin of Homo erectus is its only signiﬁcant source of support
(e.g., Armelagos 2014: “The link to changes in morphology
that are claimed to be related to cooking are confounded by the
evidence for the control of ﬁre” [1333]). Given the contrary
archaeological evidence, such a perspective can easily relegate
a dependence on cooking and the control of ﬁre to a later time
in human evolution. The implication is that compared with
other changes responsible for H. erectus, the evolution of cooking and the control of ﬁre have had relatively little inﬂuence
on behavior and adaptation. This kind of thinking presumably explains why some recent papers considering the origin of
H. erectus and the reasons for its higher-quality diet, larger

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Wrangham

The Cooking Hypothesis

body, and larger brain have omitted any consideration of the
cooking hypothesis (Antón and Snodgrass 2012; Potts 2012).
In fact, however, the evidence of increased dietary quality in
the early Lower Paleolithic is only one of several sources of
support for the cooking hypothesis, as discussed above. Furthermore, the emergence of H. erectus is not adequately accounted for by an increased frequency of meat eating. Thus,
while the cooking hypothesis may be wrong, it cannot fairly be
dismissed by ignoring it.
Accordingly, two questions must be answered before the
time for the control of ﬁre is assigned to the mid-Pleistocene.
First, how could H. erectus use increased energy, reduce its
chewing efﬁciency, and sleep safely on the ground without ﬁre?
Second, how could a cooked diet have been introduced to a
raw-foodist, mid-Pleistocene Homo without having major effects on its evolutionary biology? Satisfactory answers to these
questions will do much to resolve the tension between archaeological and biological evidence.
The results should be rewarding. The control of ﬁre and the
emergence of cooking had numerous effects on human biology
and behavior, including cognition and cooperation (Attwell,
Kovarovic, and Kendal 2015; Burton 2009; Dunbar and Gowlett 2014; Gintis, van Schaik, and Boehm 2015; Wiessner 2014;
Wrangham 2009). A better understanding of when the process
started will have wide-ranging implications for human biological and social evolution.

Acknowledgments
I thank Francesco Berna, Dennis Sandgathe, Leslie Aiello,
Laurie Obbink, and fellow participants for a fascinating WennerGren conference, “Fire and the Genus Homo,” October 16–22,
2015, in Sintra, Portugal. Rachel Carmody and Nancy-Lou
Conklin-Brittain have been invaluable collaborators for a decade and more. Dawn Brasaemle and Caroline Pond offered
helpful ideas about lipids. Manuel Dominguez-Rodrigo and two
anonymous reviewers kindly made constructive comments.

References Cited
Aiello, Leslie, and Peter Wheeler. 1995. The expensive-tissue hypothesis: the
brain and the digestive system in human and primate evolution. Current
Anthropology 36:199–221.
Alperson-Aﬁl, N. 2008. Continual ﬁre-making by hominins at Gesher Benot
Ya‘aqov, Israel. Quaternary Science Reviews 27:1733–1739.
Antón, Susan C., Richard Potts, and Leslie C. Aiello. 2014. Evolution of early
Homo: an integrated biological perspective. Science 345:1236828.
Antón, Susan C., and J. Josh Snodgrass. 2012. Origins and evolution of genus
Homo: new perspectives. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S479–S496.
Armelagos, George J. 2014. Brain evolution, the determinates of food choice,
and the omnivore’s dilemma. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 54(10):1330–1341.
Arrese, Estela L., and Jose L. Soulages. 2010. Insect fat body: energy, metabolism, and regulation. Annual Review of Entomology 55:207–225.
Attwell, Laura, Kris Kovarovic, and Jeremy R. Kendal. 2015. Fire in the PlioPleistocene: the functions of hominin ﬁre use, and the mechanistic, developmental and evolutionary consequences. Journal of Anthropological
Sciences 93:1–20.

S311
Axelsson, Erik, Abhirami Ratnakumar, Maja-Louise Arendt, Khurram Maqbool, Matthew T. Webster, Michele Perloski, Olof Liberg, Jon M. Arnemo,
Åke Hedhammar, and Kerstin Lindblad-Toh. 2013. The genomic signature
of dog domestication reveals adaptation to a starch-rich diet. Nature 495
(7441):360–364.
Balikci, Asen. 1989. The Netsilik Eskimo. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.
Barkai, Ran, Jordi Rosell, Ruth Blasco, and Avi Gopher. 2017. Fire for a reason: barbecue at Middle Pleistocene Qesem Cave, Israel. Current Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S314–S328.
Barr, Susan I. 1999. Vegetarianism and menstrual cycle disturbances: is there
an association? American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 70:549S–554S.
Barton, R. A. 1992. Allometry of food intake in free-ranging anthropoid
primates. Folia primatologica 58:56–59.
Ben-Dor, Miki, Avi Gopher, and Ran Barkai. 2016. Neandertals’ large lower
thorax may represent adaptation to high protein diet. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 160(3):367–378.
Ben-Dor, Miki, Avi Gopher, Israel Hershkovitz, and Ran Barkai. 2011. Man
the fat hunter: the demise of Homo erectus and the emergence of a new
hominin lineage in the Middle Pleistocene (ca. 400 kyr) Levant. PLoS ONE
6(12):e28689.
Berna, F., P. Goldberg, L. K. Horwitz, J. Brink, S. Holt, M. Bamford, and
M. Chazan. 2012. Microstratigraphic evidence of in situ ﬁre in the Acheulean strata of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape Province, South Africa.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 109:E1215–
E1220.
Boback, Scott M., Christian L. Cox, Brian D. Ott, Rachel Carmody, Richard
W. Wrangham, and Stephen M. Secor. 2007. Cooking reduces the cost of
meat digestion. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 148:651–656.
Bosinski, G. 2006. Les premiers peuplements de l’Europe centrale et de l’est.
Comptes Rendus Palevol 5(1/2):311–317.
Brace, C. Loring. 1995. The stages of human evolution. 5th ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bramble, Dennis M., and Daniel E. Lieberman. 2004. Endurance running and
the evolution of Homo. Nature 432:345–352.
Brasaemle, Dawn L. 2007. The perilipin family of structural lipid droplet
proteins: stabilization of lipid droplets and control of lipolysis. Journal of
Lipid Research 48:2547–2559.
Buck, Laura T., J. Collette Berbesque, Brian M. Wood, and Chris B. Stringer.
2016. Tropical forager gastrophagy and its implications for extinct hominin
diets. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 5:672–679.
Burton, F. D. 2009. Fire: the spark that ignited human evolution. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.
Carlson, Bryce A., and John D. Kingston. 2007. Docosahexaenoic acid, the
aquatic diet, and hominin encephalization: difﬁculties in establishing evolutionary links. American Journal of Human Biology 19:132–141.
Carmody, Rachel N. 2012. Energetic consequences of thermal and nonthermal food processing. PhD dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA.
Carmody, Rachel N., Michael Dannemann, Adrian W. Briggs, Birgit Nickel,
Emily E. Groopman, Richard W. Wrangham, and Janet Kelso. 2016. Genetic evidence of human adaptation to a cooked diet. Genome Biology and
Evolution 8(4):1091–1103.
Carmody, Rachel N., Gil S. Weintraub, and Richard W. Wrangham. 2011.
Energetic consequences of thermal and non-thermal food processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108(48):19199–
19203.
Carmody, Rachel N., and Richard W. Wrangham. 2009. The energetic signiﬁcance of cooking. Journal of Human Evolution 57:379–391.
Carpenter, Danielle, Sugandha Dhar, Laura M. Mitchell, Beiyuan Fu, Jess
Tyson, Nzar A. A. Shwan, Fengtang Yang, Mark G. Thomas, and John A. L.
Armour. 2015. Obesity, starch digestion and amylase: association between
copy number variants at human salivary (AMY1) and pancreatic (AMY2)
amylase genes. Human Molecular Genetics 24(12):3472–3480.
Chisholm, Rebecca H., James M. Trauer, Darren Curnoe, and Mark M.
Tanaka. 2016. Controlled ﬁre use in early humans might have triggered the
evolutionary emergence of tuberculosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA 113(32):9051–9056.
Coolidge, Frederick L., and Thomas Wynn. 2006. The effects of the tree-toground sleep transition in the evolution of cognition in early Homo. Before
Farming 4:1–18.
Coon, Carleton S. 1962. The history of man: from the ﬁrst human to primitive
culture and beyond. 2nd ed. London: Jonathan Cape.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

S312

Current Anthropology

Crittenden, A. N. 2011. The importance of honey consumption in human
evolution. Food and Foodways 19:257–273.
de Heinzelin, Jean, J. Desmond Clark, Tim White, William Hart, Paul Renne,
Giday WoldeGabriel, Yonas Beyene, and Elisabeth Vrba. 1999. Environment
and behavior of 2.5-million-year-old Bouri hominids. Science 284:625–629.
Domínguez-Rodrigo, Manuel, and Luis Alcalá. 2016. 3.3-million-year-old
stone tools and butchery traces? more evidence needed. Paleoanthropology
2016:46253.
Dominy, Nathaniel J., Erin R. Vogel, Justin D. Yeakel, Paul Constantino, and
Peter W. Lucas. 2008. Mechanical properties of plant underground storage
organs and implications for dietary models of early hominins. Evolutionary
Biology 35:159–175.
Dunbar, R. I. M., and J. A. J. Gowlett. 2014. Fireside chat: the impact of ﬁre on
hominin socioecology. In Lucy to language: the benchmark papers. R. I. M.
Dunbar, C. Gamble, and J. A. J. Gowlett, eds. Pp. 277–296. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dunham, K. M., and Martyn G. Murray. 1982. The fat reserves of impala,
Aepyceros melampus. African Journal of Ecology 20:81–87.
Elgar, Mark, Mark D. Pagel, and Paul H. Harvey. 1988. Sleep in mammals.
Animal Behaviour 36:1407–1419.
———. 1990. Sources of variation in mammalian sleep. Animal Behaviour
40:991–995.
Emery Thompson, Melissa, and Richard W. Wrangham. 2008. Diet and reproductive function in wild female chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii). American Journal of Physical Anthropology 135(2):171–181.
Eng, Carolyn M., Daniel E. Lieberman, Katherine D. Zink, and Michael A.
Peters. 2013. Bite force and occlusal stress production in hominin evolution. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 151:544–557.
Finarelli, John A., and John J. Flynn. 2009. Brain-size evolution and sociality
in Carnivora. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA
106(23):9345–9349.
Fonseca-Azevedo, Karina, and Suzana Herculano-Houzel. 2012. Metabolic
constraint imposes tradeoff between body size and number of brain neurons in human evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA 109(45):18571–18576.
Gintis, Herbert, Carel van Schaik, and Christopher Boehm. 2015. The evolutionary origins of human political systems. Current Anthropology 56(3):
327–353.
Gowlett, John A. J., and R. W. Wrangham. 2013. Earliest ﬁre in Africa: towards the convergence of archaeological evidence and the cooking hypothesis. Azania: Archaeological Research in Africa 48:5–30.
Groopman, Emily, R. N. Carmody, and R. W. Wrangham. 2015. Cooking
increases net energy gain from a lipid-rich food. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 156(1):11–18.
Hardy, Karen, Jennie Brand-Miller, Katherine D. Brown, Mark G. Thomas,
and Les Copeland. 2015. The importance of dietary carbohydrate in human
evolution. Quarterly Review of Biology 90(3):251–268.
Hardy, Karen, Anita Radini, Stephen Buckley, Ruth Blasco, Les Copeland,
Francesc Burjachs, Josep Girbal, Riker Yll, Eudald Carbonell, and Jose María
Bermúdez de Castro. 2016. Diet and environment 1.2 million years ago
revealed through analysis of dental calculus from Europe’s oldest hominin
at Sima del Elefante, Spain. Science of Nature, doi:10.1007/s00114-016
-1420-x.
Henry, Amanda G. 2017. Neanderthal cooking and the costs of ﬁre. Current
Anthropology 58(suppl. 16):S329–S336.
Hladik, C. Marcel, David J. Chivers, and P. Pasquet. 1999. On diet and gut size
in non-human primates and humans: is there a relationship to brain size?
Current Anthropology 40:695–697.
Holliday, Trenton W. 2012. Body size, body shape, and the circumscription of
the genus Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S330–S345.
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer. 2009. Mothers and others: the evolutionary origins of
mutual understanding. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hubbard, Troy D., Iain A. Murray, William H. Bisson, Alexis P. Sullivan,
Aswathy Sebastian, George H. Perry, Nina G. Jablonski, and Gary H. Perdew. 2016. Divergent Ah receptor ligand selectivity during hominin evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution, doi:10.1093/molbeh/msw143.
Hublin, Jean-Jacques. 2015. Paleoanthropology: how old is the oldest human?
Current Biology 25:R448–R469.
Isler, Karin, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2012. How our ancestors broke through
the gray ceiling: comparative evidence for cooperative breeding in early
Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S453–S465.
Koebnick, Corinna, C. Strassner, I. Hoffmann, and C. Leitzmann. 1999. Consequences of a longterm raw food diet on body weight and menstruation:

Volume 58, Supplement 16, August 2017

results of a questionnaire survey. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism 43:69–
79.
Koops, Kathelijne, Tatyana Humle, Elisabeth H. M. Stereck, and Tetsuro
Matsuzawa. 2007. Ground-nesting by the chimpanzees of the Nimba Mountains, Guinea: environmentally or socially determined? American Journal of
Primatology 69:407–419.
Kraft, Thomas S., and Vivek V. Venkataraman. 2015. Could plant extracts
have enabled hominins to acquire honey before the control of ﬁre? Journal
of Human Evolution 85:65–74.
Lentle, Roger G., and Patrick W. M. Janssen. 2011. The physical processes of
digestion. New York: Springer.
Leonard, W. R., J. J. Snodgrass, and M. L. Robertson. 2007. Effects of brain
evolution on human nutrition and metabolism. Annual Review of Nutrition
27:311–327.
Lesku, John A., Timothy C. Roth II, Charles J. Amlaner, and Steven L. Lima.
2006. A phylogenetic analysis of sleep architecture in mammals: the integration of anatomy, physiology, and ecology. American Naturalist 168(4):
441–453.
Lupo, Karen D. 1998. Experimentally derived extraction rates for marrow:
implications for body part exploitation strategies of Plio-Pleistocene hominid scavengers. Journal of Archaeological Science 25:657–675.
Marlowe, F. W., J. C. Berbesque, B. Wood, A. Crittenden, C. Porter, and A.
Mabulla. 2014. Honey, Hadza, hunter-gatherers, and human evolution. Journal of Human Evolution 71:119–128.
Marshall, Andrew J., and Richard W. Wrangham. 2007. Evolutionary consequences of fallback foods. International Journal of Primatology 28:1219–
1235.
Martin, Robert D., David J. Chivers, Anne M. MacLarnon, and C. Marcel
Hladik. 1985. Gastrointestinal allometry in primates and other mammals.
In Size and scaling in primate biology. W. L. Jungers, ed. Pp. 61–89. New
York: Plenum.
McPherron, Shannon P., Zeresenay Alemseged, Curtis W. Marean, Jonathan
G. Wynn, Denné Reed, Denis Geraads, René Bobe, and Hamdallah A.
Béarat. 2010. Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature 466:857–860.
Milton, Katharine, and Montague W. Demment. 1988. Chimpanzees fed high
and low ﬁber diets and comparison with human data. Journal of Nutrition
118:1082–1088.
Organ, Chris L., Charles L. Nunn, Zarin Machanda, and Richard W. Wrangham. 2011. Phylogenetic rate shifts in chewing time during the evolution of
Homo. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108:
14555–14559.
Packer, Craig, A. Swanson, D. Ikanda, and H. Kushnir. 2011. Fear of darkness,
the full moon and the nocturnal ecology of African lions. PLoS ONE 6(7):
e22285.
Parker, Christopher H., Earl R. Keefe, Nicole M. Herzog, James F. O’Connell,
and Kristen Hawkes. 2016. The pyrophilic primate hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology 25:54–63.
Perry, G. H., N. J. Dominy, K. G. Claw, A. S. Lee, H. Fiegler, R. Redon, J.
Werner, et al. 2007. Diet and the evolution of human amylase gene copy
number variation. Nature Genetics 39:1256–1260.
Perry, G. H., L. Kistler, M. A. Kelaita, and A. J. Sams. 2015. Insights into
hominin phenotypic and dietary evolution from ancient DNA sequence
data. Journal of Human Evolution 79:55–63.
Perry, George H. 2014. Parasites and human evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 23:218–228.
Pontzer, Herman. 2012. Ecological energetics in early Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S346–S358.
Potts, Richard. 2012. Environmental and behavioral evidence pertaining to
the evolution of early Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S299–S317.
Prüfer, K., F. Racimo, N. Patterson, F. Jay, S. Sankararaman, S. Sawyer, A.
Heinze, et al. 2014. The complete genome sequence of a Neanderthal from
the Altai Mountains. Nature 505:43–49.
Ragir, S., M. Rosenberg, and P. Tierno. 2000. Gut morphology and the
avoidance of carrion among chimpanzees, baboons, and early hominids.
Journal of Anthropological Research 56(4):477–512.
Reed, David L., Jessica E. Light, Julie M. Allen, and Jeremy J. Kirchman. 2007.
Pair of lice lost or parasites regained: the evolutionary history of anthropoid
primate lice. BMC Biology 5(7):1–11.
Reiter, T., E. Jagoda, and T. D. Capellini. 2016. Dietary variation and evolution of gene copy number among dog breeds. PLoS ONE 11(2):e0148899.
Rightmire, G. Philip. 2004. Brain size and encephalization in early to midPleistocene Homo. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 124:109–123.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

Wrangham

The Cooking Hypothesis

Roebroeks, Wil, and Paola Villa. 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual
use of ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 108(13):5209–5214.
Rosell, Magdalena, Paul Appleby, and Tim Key. 2005. Height, age at menarche, body weight and body mass index in life-long vegetarians. Public
Health Nutrition 8(7):870–875.
Sandgathe, Dennis M., Harold L. Dibble, Paul Goldberg, Shannon P. McPherron,
Alain Turq, Laura Niven, and Jamie Hodgkins. 2011a. On the role of ﬁre in
Neandertal adaptations in Western Europe: evidence from Pech de l’Azé IV
and Roc de Marsal, France. Paleoanthropology 2011:216–242.
———. 2011b. Timing of the appearance of habitual ﬁre use. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 108(29):E298.
Schmid, P. 1983. Eine Rekonstruktion des Skelettes von A.L. 288-1 (Hadar)
und deren Konsequenzes. Folia Primatologica 40:283–306.
Schnorr, Stephanie L., Alyssa N. Crittenden, Koen Venema, Frank W. Marlowe, and Amanda G. Henry. 2015. Assessing digestibility of Hadza tubers
using a dynamic in-vitro model. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
158:371–385.
Schwartz, Gary T. 2012. Growth, development, and life history throughout the
evolution of Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S395–S408.
Shimelmitz, Ron, Steven L. Kuhn, Arthur J. Jelinek, Avraham Ronen, Amy E.
Clark, and Mina Weinstein-Evron. 2014. “Fire at will”: the emergence of
habitual ﬁre use 350,000 years ago. Journal of Human Evolution 77(suppl. 1):
196–203.
Shipman, Pat. 2009. Cooking debate goes off the boil. Nature 459:1059–1060.
Smith, Alex R., Rachel N. Carmody, Rachel J. Dutton, and Richard W.
Wrangham. 2015. The signiﬁcance of cooking for early hominin scavenging. Journal of Human Evolution 84:62–70.
Speth, John. 2010. The paleoanthropology and archaeology of big-game
hunting: protein, fat or politics? New York: Springer.
Spoor, Fred, Philipp Gunz, Simon Neubauer, Stefanie Stelzer, Nadia Scott,
Amandus Kwekason, and M. Christopher Dean. 2015. Reconstructed Homo
habilis type OH 7 suggests deep-rooted species diversity in early Homo. Nature 519:83–86.
Spottiswoode, Claire N., Keith S. Begg, and Colleen M. Begg. 2016. Reciprocal
signaling in honeyguide-human mutualism. Science 353:387–389.
Stiner, Mary C. 1994. Honor among thieves. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stiner, Mary C., Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher. 2009. Cooperative hunting and
meat sharing 400–200 kya at Qesem Cave, Israel. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 106(32):13207–13212.
Swanson, Eli M., Kay E. Holekamp, Barbara L. Lundrigan, Bradley M. Arsznov,
and Sharleen T. Sakai. 2012. Multiple determinants of whole and regional
brain volume among terrestrial carnivorans. PLoS ONE 7(6):e38447.
Symons, Michael. 1998. A history of cooks and cooking. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.

S313
Thompson, Jennifer L., and Andrew J. Nelson. 2011. Middle childhood and
modern human origins. Human Nature 22(3):249–280.
Ungar, Peter S. 2012. Dental evidence for the reconstruction of diet in African
early Homo. Current Anthropology 53(suppl. 6):S318–S329.
Ungar, Peter S., and Robert S. Scott. 2009. Dental evidence for diets of early
Homo. In The ﬁrst humans: origins of the genus Homo. F. E. Grine, J. G.
Fleagle, and R. E. Leakey, eds. Pp. 121–134. New York: Springer.
Villmoare, Brian, William H. Kimbel, Chalachew Seyoum, Christopher J.
Campisano, Erin DiMaggio, John Rowan, David R. Braun, J. Ramon Arrowsmith, and Kaye E. Reed. 2015. Early Homo at 2.8 Ma from LediGeraru, Afar, Ethiopia. Science 347(6228):1352–1355.
Walker, M. J., D. Anesin, D. Angelucci, A. Avilés-Fernández, F. Berna, A. T.
Buitrago-López, J. S. Carrión, et al. 2016. A view from a cave: Cueva Negra
del Estrecho del Río Quípar (Caravaca de la Cruz, Murcia, Southeastern
Spain): reﬂections on ﬁre, technological diversity, environmental exploitation, and palaeoanthropological approaches. Human Evolution 31(1/2):1–67.
Warneken, Felix, and Alex Rosati. 2015. Cognitive capacities for cooking in
chimpanzees. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 282:1809.
Whitehouse, S. J. O. 1977. The diet of the dingo in Western Australia. Australian Wildlife Research 4(2):145–150.
Wiessner, Polly W. 2014. Embers of society: ﬁrelight talk among the Ju/
’hoansi Bushmen. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA 111(39):14027–14035.
Wood, Bernard A., and Mark Collard. 1999. The human genus. Science 284:65–71.
Wrangham, R. W. 2011. Honey and ﬁre in human evolution. In Casting the
net wide. J. Sept and D. Pilbeam, eds. Pp. 149–167. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum.
Wrangham, Richard W. 2009. Catching ﬁre: how cooking made us human.
New York: Basic.
———. 2006. The cooking enigma. In Early hominin diets: the known, the
unknown, and the unknowable. P. Ungar, ed. Pp. 308–323. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wrangham, Richard W., and Rachel Carmody. 2010. Human adaptation to
the control of ﬁre. Evolutionary Anthropology 19:187–199.
Wrangham, Richard W., and Nancy L. Conklin-Brittain. 2003. The biological
signiﬁcance of cooking in human evolution. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology A 136:35–46.
Wrangham, Richard W., James Holland Jones, Greg Laden, David Pilbeam,
and Nancy Lou Conklin-Brittain. 1999. The raw and the stolen: cooking
and the ecology of human origins. Current Anthropology 40:567–594.
Zink, K., and Daniel E. Lieberman. 2016. Impact of meat and Lower
Palaeolithic food processing techniques on chewing in humans. Nature 531
(7595):500–503.
Zink, Katherine D., Daniel E. Lieberman, and Peter W. Lucas. 2014. Food
material properties and early hominin processing techniques. Journal of
Human Evolution 77:155–166.

This content downloaded from 132.229.250.193 on September 23, 2019 06:59:41 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

