Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92
DOI 10.1007/s12520-013-0146-3

ORIGINAL PAPER

Where are the roofs? A geo-ethnoarchaeological study
of mud brick structures and their collapse processes, focusing
on the identification of roofs
David E. Friesem & Georgia Tsartsidou &
Panagiotis Karkanas & Ruth Shahack-Gross
Received: 4 February 2013 / Accepted: 20 May 2013 / Published online: 10 June 2013
# Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Abstract Unlike floors that have been given a lot of attention in archaeological research, the study of roofs is long
neglected. Here, we present a study of modern abandoned
and burnt mud brick structures, conducted in southern Israel
and northern Greece. Using macroscopic observations and
interviews together with micromorphology, mineralogical,
phytolith, and phosphate analyses, we show that roofs
should be sought in close proximity to floors. We show that
roofs practically seal activity remains on floors; thus, the
importance of identifying roofs in the archaeological record
lies mainly with the ability to estimate the integrity of floors
and floor assemblages. While human behavior and maintenance practices are major factors in the deposition of primary activity remains on floors, the timing of roof collapse
determines how well activity remains will be preserved. In
addition, we show that the roof plays a major role in the
degradation process of mud structures as wall degradation is
enhanced after the collapse of the roof resulting in accumulation of mud brick degradation material on top of the
collapsed roof. As most roofs in antiquity seem to have
D. E. Friesem (*) : R. Shahack-Gross
Kimmel Center for Archaeological Science, Weizmann Institute
of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel
e-mail: david.friesem@weizmann.ac.il
R. Shahack-Gross
e-mail: ruth.shahack@weizmann.ac.il
D. E. Friesem
Jacob M. Alkow Department of Archaeology and Ancient Near
Eastern Civilizations, Tel Aviv University, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel
G. Tsartsidou : P. Karkanas
Ephoreia of Palaeoanthropology–Speleology of Southern Greece,
Ardittou 34b, 11636 Athens, Greece
G. Tsartsidou
e-mail: gtsartsidou@ymail.com
P. Karkanas
e-mail: pkarkanas@hua.gr

been composed of degradable vegetal materials, we found
that not only they leave little evidence for their presence, but
they also mix with vegetal activity remains. We therefore
use the accumulation of mud brick debris as an indicator for
the location of degraded roofs. Using microstratigraphy for
the identification of both floors and roofs is significant in
order to locate activity remains in the archaeological sedimentary sequence and to evaluate their state of preservation.
Keywords Roof . Floor . Ethnoarchaeology .
Geoarchaeology . Site formation processes .
Microstratigraphy

Introduction
In comparison to other architectural features, collapsed roofs
composed originally of easily degradable materials (e.g.,
vegetal matter and mud) are difficult to identify in archaeological sites. Degradable roofing materials seem to have
been common since antiquity until modern times. In the Old
World, durable roofing, in the form of fired clay tiles and/or
thin slate slabs, has been sporadically reported from the
Early Bronze Age (ca. 2500 B.C.) in ancient Greece
(Wiencke 1989). From the Archaic period (ca. early seventh
century B.C.), durable roof materials were used across wide
geographical regions, but mainly in monumental architecture (Sapirstein 2009; Wikander 1990). The degradable nature of most roofs thus explains why so few roofs have been
identified at archaeological sites. Yet, the importance of
roofs for archaeological interpretation is undisputable.
Firstly, roofs demarcate protected areas where human (or
livestock) activities take place, usually activities that are
different from those conducted in open, unroofed areas.
Second, roofs of various materials may relate to socioeconomic differences within settlements. Third, identifying
roofs in archaeological stratigraphic sequences is important

74

for elucidating the integrity of strata and floor assemblages
(Schiffer 1985). The latter is basic for research into activity
areas and socioeconomy. Surprisingly few studies have been
conducted specifically on roofs in the archaeological record.
Thus, we carried out an ethnoarchaeological study that
explores the degradation and collapse (i.e., taphonomy) of
roofs in Old World mud brick structures and the relationship
between roofs, floors, and activity remains in abandonment
and conflagration contexts.
In abandonment ethnographic contexts, three key studies
mention roofs. McIntosh (1977) excavated a decaying modern
mud structure in Ghana, which originally had a thatched roof.
He noticed that once the roof fell into disrepair, mud walls began
to decay, which resulted in accumulation of clay within the
decaying house. Goodman-Elgar (2008) conducted a micromorphological study of modern abandoned mud structures in
Bolivia. She noted that the organic matter from roof fall attracts
soil fauna, which in turn promotes bioturbation of floor deposits,
destroying the integrity of the earthen floor. Milek (2012) investigated an abandoned farm complex in Iceland where roofs were
made of turf. She observed that roof parts collapsed or dangled
following rotting and collapse of support poles. Once this happens, two processes act simultaneously: penetration of light and
promotion of grass growth and bioturbation on the structure’s
floor, and enhanced wall degradation and collapse. Milek (2012)
further noted that a collapsed roof may seal and protect a
structure’s activity floor from major postdepositional disturbance. Most other studies dealing with abandoned structures
point out that abandoned structures tend to be infilled by waste
from secondary use and during the last stages of abandonment
they act as dumping areas (e.g., Healan 2000; Ziadeh-Seely
1999). Recently Friesem et al. (2011) showed that abandoned
mud brick structures are also infilled by sediments from the
decaying mud walls mixed to various degrees with windblown materials. Clearly, in the context of planned abandonment, the identification of roof remains among the variety of
sediments and artifacts deposited is difficult.
Ethnographic studies of conflagration contexts have not
been reported, to our knowledge. Archaeological experiments
have shown that, in the case of mud structure conflagration, a
thatched roof will be the first to catch fire, collapse, still
burning, on the floor within minutes after the fire started,
forming an accumulation of ash and burnt deposits directly
on the floor (Bankoff and Winter 1979; Friede and Steel 1980).
Gordon (1953) noted that burning down houses was easier and
faster in thatch roofed houses relative to mud roofed houses. In
archaeological contexts, the presence of a burnt layer above a
floor is usually interpreted as a conflagration event (Friede and
Steel 1980; Gordon 1953; Namdar et al. 2011; Stevanovic
1997; Twiss et al. 2008). Other options have been demonstrated, such as accumulation of wind-blown ash and charcoal prior
to roof collapse (Namdar et al. 2011), or external fuel deposited
beneath the roof in the processes of a deliberate house

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

conflagration (Stevanovic 1997; Twiss et al. 2008). A few
studies proposed that burnt deposits on floors originated from
the roof itself (Wasley 1957; Wilshusen 1986).
Based on the above information, the study of roofs in ethnographic conflagration and abandonment contexts is crucial for
constructing Middle Range Theory pertaining to the relationship
among roofs, floors, and activity remains. A study of this sort
must consider microstratigraphy and the study of microartifacts.
Previous studies highlighted the usefulness of combining
ethnoarchaeological observations and sampling with
geoarchaeological analyses (e.g., Boivin 2000; Gé et al. 1993;
Goldberg and Whitbread 1993; Goodman-Elgar 2008;
Karkanas and Efstratiou 2009; Macphail et al. 2004; Matthews
et al. 1997; Milek 2012; Shahack-Gross et al. 2005, 2009). Most
of these studies focused on the identification of floors, their
formation, maintenance, and activity remains of various types,
with the overall aim of reconstructing human behavior. Other
studies investigated degradation and depositional processes and
thus the manner by which abandoned habitation and/or ephemeral sites (and the materials within them) transform into an
archaeological site (e.g., Boivin 2001; Friesem et al. 2011;
Goldberg and Whitbread 1993; Goodman-Elgar 2008; Mallol
et al. 2007; Mcintosh 1974; Milek 2012; Shahack-Gross et al.
2003; Terry et al. 2004; Tsartsidou et al. 2008).
The study of roofs, their degradation processes, their
relationship to floors and floor assemblages, and their overall role in archaeological site formation has been neglected.
Therefore, the aim of the study presented here is to supply
macro- and microscopic observations on the role of roofs in
archaeological site formation and interpretation. The research strategy that we employed to approach this archaeological question is studying collapsed and buried sediments
in mud brick structures that have not been in use in the last
10–65 years. We will show that such abandoned structures
and the sediments within them have undergone degradation
to the extent that they appear quite similar to an archaeological site. Thus, we followed archaeological methods (excavation, recording, and sampling) in several such abandonment ethnographic contexts. In so doing, the study has two
important advantages—it analyzes sediments that are practically archaeological, and it exploits the availability of
direct and indirect ethnographic information. The research
reported below was conducted in two different geographic
areas (arid southern Israel and temperate northern Greece),
employing a variety of microarchaeological techniques.

The ethnoarchaeological contexts
Gvulot, western Negev, Israel
An abandoned mud brick house was located in the Besor
semi-arid area (150–200 mm average annual precipitation)

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

near Kibbutz Gvulot in southwestern Israel (Fig. 1a). There
is no direct historical or ethnographic documentation of the
Gvulot mud house itself. General information collected and
published by explorers in Palestine during the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries (e.g., Canaan 1932–1933;
Dalman 1928–1942) and later more specific information
regarding the Besor area compiled by Gazit (1986, 2000)
indicate that the Gvulot mud house was built by Bedouins
(nomadic pastoralists), who settled in the region during the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, under the Ottoman
and the British mandatory regimes. This relates to a process
that started in the first half of the nineteenth century in
which large populations of Egyptian peasants and
Bedouins migrated from the Sinai Peninsula to the Besor
region encouraged by economic opportunities and relative
security due to diminishing tribal conflicts in the area under
the Ottoman regime. Under these stable conditions, the
Bedouins were encouraged by the Ottoman Sultans to settle
down and cultivate the land (Gazit 2000). These
sedentarized Bedouins partly kept their housing tradition
by building their mud brick farm houses in an architectural
plan similar to that of the black tent, i.e., a living section
composed of two rooms, one for men and the other for
women, and a large walled courtyard (Gazit 1986). These
mud brick houses did not have any windows. The roof was
built as follows: a lower level of large wooden beams
covered by a braid of vegetal stems (e.g., dry reeds, palm
leaves, thorn bushes, or cornstalks), the latter covered by
mud mixed with straw (Canaan 1932–1933; Gazit 1986).
Figure 2 shows a possible modern parallel for such roof
construction technique observed in 2011 in Uzbekistan.
Fig. 1 Location and appearance
of the study areas. a The Gvulot
mud house, southern Israel
(looking northeast) at the end of
the second season of excavation
(April 2011). Length of wall in the
foreground is about 8 m. b Part of
the abandoned mud brick village
of Kranionas, northern Greece.
Most of the structures in this
village are either totally
abandoned (decaying) or in use as
animal shelters and/or storage of
fodder

75

Based on the above information, and on large amounts of
Gaza Ware, a local pottery typical of the Ottoman period
(Gazit 1986), scattered in the vicinity of the studied house,
Gazit suggested that the Gvulot mud house was built in the
early twentieth century (D. Gazit personal communication.
It was abandoned in 1948 as the Besor area suffered from
the outcomes of war between Egypt and Israel. Since the
early 1950s, the region has been used by the Israeli army as
training grounds. The studied mud house is thus decaying
since 1948.
Field work at this house was carried out in April 2009
and May 2011. Friesem et al. (2011) reconstructed the house
shape, wall heights, and locations of roofed and unroofed
areas. In addition, they conducted geoarchaeological analyses by which they were able to identify sediment infill
sources at the abandoned house—pure mud brick material,
pure wind-blown sandy sediments, and gray sediments,
which are a mixture of mud brick and wind-blown sediments. They further noted that these three types of sediments filled the area of the abandoned house in
alternating/interfingering layers that seem to be related to
rainy periods (i.e., mud slurry movements with or without
wind-blown sand) and dry windy periods (i.e., wind-blown
sand infill). In addition, the floor surface was identified as a
local soil termed “husmas” (sandy soils with calcareous
concentrations, or Calcic Rhodoxeralf; Singer 2007). The
floor surface is generally white. At places, it was found to be
as much as 30 cm thick, indicating that the house was built
on a flattened soil surface rather than soil that was brought
and spread while the house was built (Table 1; for more
details, see Friesem et al. 2011).

76

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

Fig. 2 Roof construction
observed in rural Uzbekistan
(Samarkand area, 2011). a Early
stages of roof construction:
wooden beams form the roof
skeleton. b Later stages of
construction: the wooden beams
are covered by wood branches
and leaves. c Final stages of
construction: mud is plastered
over the vegetal roof

Kranionas, northern Greece
The village of Kranionas is located 12 km north-west of
Kastoria, at 817 m above sea level where average annual
precipitation is 700 mm (Fig. 1b). Almost all structures in
the village are built from mud bricks. The following information was recorded by us during a 1-week field work at the
village (May 2010) through interviews with Mr. and Mrs.
Lovatsis, who were born in the village, lived in it until its
abandonment and now live in a nearby village.
The village of Kranionas was established during the early
nineteenth century by Greek and Slavic speakers. The subsistence economy was based on agriculture and herding.
Agricultural staples were primarily wheat, supplemented
by barley and rye. Corn was introduced around 1951.
Livestock was primarily sheep, but also some goats, cows,
donkeys, and horses/mules. Small livestock were kept in
mud brick built enclosures, while the larger animals were
kept on the ground floors of houses (Fig. 3a). The animals’
dung was scooped out from stables and enclosures periodically, piled up on threshing floors for the winter time where
it underwent composting processes, and used in the spring
for fertilizing fields and for coating threshing floors.
During the Greek Civil War (1946–1949) most of the
population left the village for security reasons. A few
returned to the village after 1950; however, between 1967
and 1974, during “The Colonels Regime,” the village inhabitants were forcefully relocated to a modern, cementbuilt, village about 1 km west of the original mud brick
village. As the expelled inhabitants from Kranionas still care

for their old houses, they keep maintaining some of them.
Several structures are still used today, mostly as barns and
animal shelters.
The village houses are mostly two storied with the lower
floor having been used as a stable for family owned livestock and the upper floor being used for the people living
spaces (Fig. 3a). The houses and many other structures were
built of sun-dried mud bricks and wooden beams. Sun-dried
bricks were prepared from local red soil mixed with water
and chaff, the light material from wheat threshing and
winnowing (but sometimes also heavier parts such as
stems). Mud brick walls were usually constructed above
two to three courses of stones put into foundation trenches.
In some houses, the walls were covered by thin layers of
lime wash. The floors were made from mud and very rarely
replastered, and the internal structure/furnishing of the houses was mainly built from wood.
All roofs in the village were originally thatched by local
rye stems put on oak beams and branches. Roof tiles were
introduced into the region after World War II, which
changed the construction technique of roofs so that large
oak beams were covered by a braid of willow and poplar
thin branches and fern leaves, which were then covered by
the commercial roof tiles. Occasionally, imported sedges
and reeds were used. Structures used for purposes other than
human living, such as stables and barns, were either kept
with their original thatched roofs or replaced by tiled roofs
(Fig. 3b). Roofs were maintained by replacing broken tiles
every 2–3 years. The wooden beams were almost never
replaced.

Before 1930: built as a
barn for animal fodder
1947–1951: sporadic use
1951–1980: reuse for storage
of animal fodder
1980: conflagration

Kranionas C
Barn
(temperate climate)

Oak beams and
branches
covered by
commercial
roof tiles

Oak beams and
branches
covered by
commercial
roof tiles

Soil Bt horizon (=floor)
Reworked Bt material
Roof tiles and infiltrated sediment
Degraded mud brick sediment

Bt horizon of the local soil Soil Bt horizon
+ Grass fibers trampled into floor
+ Elevated concentrations of phytoliths and
Reworked Bt material
phosphate in the floor–roof complex
Black (charred) vegetal layer
Gray (ashed) vegetal and dung material + Phytolith morphologies show
high levels of rye and
Roof tiles and infiltrated sediment
domestic cereals
Degraded mud brick sediment

+ Lime plaster patches
+ Elevated concentrations of phytoliths
and phosphate in the floor–roof
complex
+ Planar voids and dung
spherulites indicate degraded
dung in enclosure
+ Phytolith morphologies indicate
wild grasses and small amounts
of domestic cereals

+ Elevated concentrations of phytoliths
and phosphate at the level of the
floor–roof complex
+ Phytolith morphologies
indicate wild grasses and
small amounts of domestic cereals

+ Elevated phosphate levels in the vicinity
of the roof beams
+ No phytoliths associated
with the roof remains
+ One small area with elevated phytolith
concentrations including phytoliths
indicative of domestic cereals

“Husmas” paleosol surface (=floor)
Windblown dust
Decayed roof beam mixed
with sediment
Degraded mud brick sediment

Bt horizon of the local soil Soil Bt horizon
Reworked Bt material
Trampled livestock dung
Charred dung mixed with burnt
plants and roof tiles
Degraded mud brick sediment

Bt horizon of the
local soil

Microscopic remains

Stratigraphy (from bottom to top)

a

All floors are beaten earth

The type of activity, structure history and roof composition are inferred from historical sources for the Gvulot mud house, while for Kranionas localities, the data are well based on detailed
information from the owners of the studied structures. Floor composition, stratigraphy, and microscopic remains are all inferred based on our own observations and analyses

Before 1930: built as an
animal enclosure
1947–1951: sporadic use
1951–1980: reuse of space
as an animal enclosure
for sheep and few goats
1980: conflagration

2000: roof collapse and
no later use

Floor compositiona

Local paleosol termed
Large wooden
“husmas”: light-colored
beams covered
soil due to high
by a braid of
concentration of
vegetal stems,
calcite in a brown
the latter covered
loam matrix
by mud mixed
with straw

Roof composition

Before 1930: built as a barn
Oak beams and
for animal fodder
branches
1947–1951: planned abandonment
covered by
commercial
1951–2000: sporadic use
roof tiles.
for fodder storage

Kranionas B
Animal enclosure
(temperate climate)

Kranionas A
Barn
(temperate climate)

Domestic Bedouin Early twentieth century:
dwelling
built by Bedouins for
dwelling in an architectural
plan similar to that of the black
tent 1948: planned
abandonment

Gvulot (arid climate)

History

Activity

Locality

Table 1 Summary of attributes related to each of the four studied contexts

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92
77

78

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

Fig. 4 The study contexts. a Aerial photograph of Kranionas, looking
north, showing the location of the abandoned Barn in locality A (A)
and the location of the burnt down animal enclosure (B) and barn (C).
Photograph by E. Efthimiou. b Drawing of Gvulot mud house showing
the location of excavation trenches (dashed gray areas, according to
year of excavation). The western part of the structure was roofed
Fig. 3 Examples of construction tradition in Kranionas. a Typical twostoried mud house with animal shelter at the ground floor and human
habitation space at the upper floor. b Roof made of wooden beams
covered by reeds and small branches covered by commercial roof tiles

The current study is based on excavation and sampling of
two types of context in Kranionas: simple abandonment and
abandonment due to accidental burning. Owing to the detailed ethnographic information available through conversations with Mr. and Mrs. Lovatsis, the study was carried out
in three structures owned by the family of Mr. and Mrs.
Lovatsis, with their agreement and under their supervision
(Fig. 4a). Each structure was assigned a different locality
based on information on its history of use (Table 1):
1. Locality A: a barn built before 1930 and used for storage
of mostly cereals in the form of wheat straw in bunches
tied together with rye stems, wild grasses, and branches of
wood with their leaves. All these were used as animal
fodder, and after 1951, corn stalks were also stored there
for animal fodder. The barn was not in use between 1947
and 1951 when the village was abandoned. Between 1951
and 2000, it was used sporadically for storage of fodder,
while after 2000, when its roof collapsed, it was abandoned permanently. The roof was built from oak beams
and branches covered by commercial roof tiles. The floor
is the local soil, untreated, according to Mr. Lovatsis. The

barn floor was cleaned with wooden forks and brooms
every spring and then covered by fresh wooden branches.
2. Locality B: an enclosure mainly for sheep and very few
goats, built before 1930. The animals were kept in the
enclosure only during the winter, while in the summer, they
were grazing up in the mountains. The enclosure was roofed
with oak beams and commercial roof tiles. The floor is the
local soil, untreated, according to Mr. Lovatsis. This floor
accumulated dung and was thus cleaned two to three times
per year by scooping up the dung with a flat wooden shovel
followed by sweeping with brooms. The floor was then left
open for a day to aerate, and then dry lime (quicklime) was
spread on the surface for hygienic purposes.
3. Locality C: a barn where cereal for animal fodder was
stored, including bunches of wheat stems and leaves
tied together with rye stems, wild grasses, wood
branches, and corn stalks. The roof was the same construction as in locality B. The floor is similar to locality
B and cleaning was conducted in the same manner as in
locality A but dry lime was not used.
Localities B and C are parts of the same structural unit
but represent different activities and use of space. After the
1947 abandonment of the village, the structures were still
sporadically used for keeping livestock and their fodder. In

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

1951, both localities were reused by the Lovatsis family for
keeping their sheep and few goats and their fodder. However,
in 1980, both localities were destroyed by fire that spread from
nearby fields into the village. Eye witnesses recall that flames
reached the roof height and that the roofs in both localities B
and C collapsed during this event. After this conflagration, the
structure was never used again.

Study methods
Fieldwork strategy
The Gvulot mud house was excavated in two seasons (2009
and 2011), each lasted 5 days. Overall, six trenches were
opened, dug to a depth of at least 10 cm below the contact of
the infill sediments with the house floor (Fig. 4b). The floor has
been identified in the 2009 season as a horizontal white sediment layer composed of a calcitic local sandy paleosol termed
“husmas” (for more details, see Friesem et al. 2011). All
macroscopic items found during the excavations were recorded
stratigraphically; profiles were drawn and photographed and
sediments were sampled for microarchaeological analyses including mineralogy, phosphate and phytolith concentrations,
and micromorphology. Bulk samples (ca. 10 g each) were
collected along sedimentary profiles, while undisturbed blocks
for micromorphological analysis were collected at various localities along the contact between the house floor and the infill
sediments.
In Kranionas, one trench was opened in each locality.
The trenches were excavated to a depth of about 10 cm
below the assumed floor levels, which were estimated
based on the presence of roof tiles and changes in the
sediment properties. In locality A (abandoned barn), the
trench cut through the barn’s wall, starting about 1 m
outside the structure and ending about 1 m within the
structure (Fig. 8). At localities B and C, the trenches
were dug from the center of each structure and ended at
the wall faces (Figs. 10 and 11). This trenching strategy
thus enabled observations and sampling both next to walls and
along room spaces. Macroscopic remains were recorded
stratigraphically, profiles were drawn and photographed, and
sediments were sampled vertically along sedimentary profiles in a similar manner to that described above for the
Gvulot mud house.
Laboratory techniques
Mineralogy using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Bulk samples were analyzed using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy in order to identify organic and
mineral components and evaluate heating temperature of

79

clay minerals. FTIR spectra were obtained using KBr pellets
at 4 cm−1 resolution with a Nicolet 380 Spectrometer and
interpreted using an internal library of infrared spectra of
archaeological materials (Weiner 2010).
Two contexts in Kranionas experienced conflagration
(localities B and C). The infrared spectrum of clays is
sensitive to changes with heating (Berna et al. 2007).
Structural water is usually lost at temperatures lower
than 500 °C, while other structural changes to the
alumino-silicate components occur at higher temperatures. As different types of clay are characterized by
different structural reactions to different heating temperatures, we heated clay found in the vicinity of Kranionas to
different temperatures. Pure clay was extracted from soils
sampled in the vicinity of Kranionas following the method
of Berna et al. (2007). The purified clay was characterized
using infrared spectroscopy, and then weighed portions were
heated in a furnace oven (Adam Mandel Ltd.©) for 4 h at 400,
450, 500, 600, and 900 °C. The dominant clay type in the
soils in the vicinity of Kranionas is kaolinite
(Al2Si2O5(OH)4); thus, this mineral is a major component in the Kranionas mud bricks. Its reaction to heating
is presented in Fig. 5 showing that structural changes
first occur at 450 °C with a disappearance of the absorption bands at 3,620, 3,697, and 1009 cm−1. These
changes are followed by the shifting of the 535 cm−1
absorption band to 555 cm−1, at 500 °C, whereas exposure to temperatures higher than 600 °C results in a
growing shift of the main silicate absorption band from
1,032 cm−1 towards higher wavenumbers (see also
Shoval et al. 2011). This experimental calibration makes
it possible to reconstruct the temperatures to which clay
minerals were exposed during the conflagration event
that led to the final abandonment of localities B and
C in Kranionas.
Phosphate concentration analysis
Phosphate concentrations were determined from representative bulk samples. The method is based on the procedure of Rypkema et al. (2007) with the following modifications: The initial weight of the samples was downscaled to 50 mg of sediment, and 1 M HCl was added at
the beginning of the procedure in order to dissolve calcite
in the studied sediments. Examination of two representative samples using FTIR spectroscopy showed no remains
of carbonates after adding the acid. The total phosphate
extracted in this method from the samples was measured
using a UV spectrophotometer (Ocean Optics USB650
UV/VIS spectrometer) at 600 nm wavelength. The instrumental limit of detection is about 0.02 % PO4. At concentrations higher than 0.05 % PO4, the instrumental
precision is about 11 %.

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

557

1039

553
534

1032
1011

400°C

3435
3438

a
4000

3500

915

536

3699
3622

b

3697
3620

915

536

450°C

1030
1009

c

1032

500°C

1032

600°C

3431

d

3435

e

900°C

3437

3442

f

561

1084

80

25°C
3000

1500

1000

500

Wavenumbers (cm-1)

wooden material identified during the excavation at Gvulot
was cleaned from attached sediment by washing and sonicating in distilled water several times for 20 min each. The wood
phytoliths were extracted by ashing (500 °C for 4 h) followed
by dissolution in 6 N HCl, washing, drying, and weighing
(Albert et al. 1999). The phytolith concentration in the wood is
presented as per 1 g of ash (to account for the concentration
expected in an archaeological context after the degradation of
the wood organic matter where carbonates are preserved, as in
Gvulot).
Phytolith concentrations at Gvulot were generally low
(see results below); therefore, morphotype analysis was
carried out only in sediment samples with phytolith concentrations higher than 30,000 phytoliths per 1 g sediment and
in the wood sample. In most samples, more than 200
phytoliths with consistent morphologies (and no less than
125 such phytoliths) were identified in order to obtain a
20 % error (Albert et al. 1999; Albert and Weiner 2001).
Phytolith extraction from Kranionas sediments followed
the procedure of Tsartsidou et al. (2008) which is suited to
organic-rich sediments from ethnoarchaeological contexts.
The phytoliths were analyzed under a petrographic microscope at ×400 magnification by counting at least 200
phytoliths of consistent morphology in each slide when possible. Samples in which <50 phytoliths were counted on a
slide were not included in the qualitative analysis. The
phytoliths were classified according to the International
Code for Phytolith Nomenclature (Madella et al. 2005).
Cereals were identified only from multicellular phytoliths
(silica skeletons) that originate from inflorescences.
Micromorphology

Fig. 5 FTIR spectra of the clay fraction (kaolinite) extracted from the soil
sampled in the vicinity of Kranionas, showing spectral changes with
heating at various temperatures for 4 h. These spectral changes are used
as “fingerprints” for reconstruction of heating temperatures (see text). a
Unheated. b Heated to 400 °C showing no structural changes. c Heated to
450 °C showing disappearance of the absorption bands at 3,697 and
3,620 cm−1 (i.e., loss of structural water), the Si–O–Si absorption at
1,009 cm−1 and the Al–O–H absorption at 915 cm−1. d Heated to 500 °C
showing shifting of the 535 cm−1 Si–O–Al absorption to 555 cm−1. e
Heated to 600 °C showing shift of the main silicate Si–O–Si absorption
from 1,032 to 1,039 cm−1. f Heated to 900 °C showing further shift of the
main silicate absorption band to 1,084 cm−1 and broadening of this absorbance band, which indicate a change in lattice parameters of the clay
crystalline structure (Berna et al. 2007). The Y axis gives the relative
absorbance intensity

Undisturbed monolithic sediment blocks were sampled in
both Gvulot and Kranionas using jackets made of Plaster of
Paris. The blocks were dried in an oven at 50 °C for 3 days and
then impregnated using a 9:1 mixture of polyester resin with
acetone and 1 % v/v MEKP. Precut sample slices, measuring
2×3 inches, were sent to Quality Thin Sections, Tucson, AZ,
USA, where 30-μm thick thin sections were prepared. The
thin sections were studied using polarizing light microscopes
(Nikon Labophot2-LOP, Nikon Eclipse 50iPOL and Zeiss
Axioscope Pol 40) at various magnifications (×12.5, 20, 40,
50, 100, and 400). Micromorphological descriptions follow
the terminology of Bullock et al. (1985) and Stoops (2003).

Phytolith analyses

Results and discussion

Phytoliths from the Gvulot mud house were extracted from
representative bulk sediment samples following the procedure
of Katz et al. (2010) and counted using a petrographic microscope (Nikon Eclipse 50iPOL) at ×200 magnification. A

Gvulot mud house
Friesem et al. (2011) reconstructed two large walled spaces
based on their 2009 excavation season. A larger space

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

(about 9×8.5 m) was defined in the east, which was
interpreted as a courtyard, and a smaller space (about 5×
8.5 m) was identified in the west—preserving higher mud
brick walls than in the east—which was interpreted as the
roofed living quarters (Fig. 4b). In the 2011 season, a
division of the roofed area, probably into men’s and
women’s quarters, was found constructed of a small mud
brick wall. This observation fits the expected house structure based on Gazit (1986). Despite this find, we treat the
roofed area as one unit, as there was no direct ethnographic
information available in the study of this house.
Apart from a relatively dense scatter of broken Gaza
Ware sherds outside the house, artifacts related to the original occupation of the house found on the house floor were
very scarce (Fig. 6a). This relatively “empty” floor indicates
that abandonment was planned and that the house inhabitants took most of their possessions (Brooks 1993; Joyce
and Johannessen 1993; Schiffer 1972, 1976, 1985, 1987;
Stevenson 1982). Yellow sandy sediment covers most of the
house floor, indicating accumulation of wind-blown material immediately upon house abandonment. This thin yellow
layer is overlain by brown and gray sediments, which are the
result of slurry flows of decaying mud bricks from the house
walls (interpretation of sediment origins is based on Friesem
et al. 2011). These layers of sediment are associated with

Fig. 6 Macroscopic artifacts found in the Gvulot mud house excavation. a Metal artifacts characteristic of early twentieth century Bedouin
material culture exposed directly on the house floor related to its
original occupation. Scale bar=20 cm. b Metal barrels exposed in the
infill sediment related to army activity in the abandoned house during
the 1950s and 1960s. Width of the trench=1 m

81

artifacts dated to the 1950s and 1960s left by Israeli soldiers.
The latter artifacts are mostly large, including metal barrels
and asbestos sheets, which are concentrated in the northern
part of the house’s roofed area (Fig. 6b).
Results of the microscopic analyses are summarized in
Table 1. One locality in the excavated area, close to the
southern wall in the roofed area, included the remains of
wooden beams interpreted as parts of the house’s original
roof. These wood remains, which were exposed about 3 cm
above the house’s floor, are associated with yellow windblown sediment, indicating that the roof collapsed some
time after the house was abandoned (Fig. 7a). The wooden
remains, identified as Abies alba, a European conifer (N.
Liphschitz: personal communication), were covered by a
thick accumulation of mud bricks, interpreted as the inwards
collapse remains of the houses’s southern wall, which were
further covered by brown and gray mud brick decay material and wind-blown sand (Fig. 7b). A coin issued in 1952
and a plastic bag stamped with the date of 1968 were found
in the sediments above this collapse, i.e., the collapse predates the 1960s.
Phosphate analysis in the vicinity of the roof remains
showed that, while the wood itself and sediments associated
with it have concentrations of about 0.2 % phosphate, sediments below or above the wood remains are deficient of
phosphate (i.e., below the instrumental detection limit,
which is 0.02 % phosphate; Fig. 7a). These results indicate
that decayed roofing materials may leave clear chemical
signatures. The sediment between the roof beams, originating from a mixture of degraded wood and infill sediment, is
practically devoid of phytoliths, while the wood and sediments below and above it include very small amounts of
phytoliths (lower than 30,000 phytoliths per 1 g of sediment) (Fig. 7a). Phytolith morphotype analysis shows that
while the wood remains included only dicotyledonous
wood/bark phytoliths (as expected), sediments below and
above the wood remains were composed of a mixture of
monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous phytoliths. These results indicate that, with such low phytolith concentrations in
wooden materials (see also Albert 2000; Tsartsidou et al.
2008), the phytolith signature of wooden roof beams would
be very difficult to identify archaeologically and that the wood
phytoliths may readily be mixed with other types of phytoliths
given bioturbation activity in the sediments. Indications for
other types of vegetation composing the roof were not found.
Micromorphological analysis confirms the macroscopic
interpretation in the field, i.e., the placement of the wooden
beams on wind-blown sediment above the house floor and
their being covered by mud brick material. The organic
components in the sampled wood beams are in a process
of degradation (Fig. 7c).
We note that phytolith analyses from various localities on
the house floor found only one “hot spot”—an accumulation

82

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

tools and pottery sherds (Fig. 6a). A few localities with
elevated phosphate readings (about 0.9 % PO4) were identified along the house infill sediments, all of them associated
with the Israeli soldiers’ activities. No indications for livestock keeping in the house courtyard have been identified
despite rigorous mineralogical, phytolith, phosphate, and
micromorphological analyses. Livestock was not kept in
the Gvulot mud house courtyard.
In conclusion, activity remains in the abandoned Gvulot
mud house were very few. Roof remains were identified only
in a small area close to the southern wall of the roofed area,
overlain by a thick accumulation of wall collapse. We assume
that roof remains preserved specifically in this locality due to
the fast burial of the roof material under wall collapse. This
indicates that chances for preservation of organic roof remains
may be possible if shortly after roof collapse walls also collapse and seal the burial environment, as much as possible,
from oxygen. Phosphate and phytolith analyses indicate that
when wooden remains leave such a weak signal, it would be
practically impossible to identify roof remains using these
methods in an abandonment context.
Kranionas
Results from all localities are summarized in Table 1.
Below, we present the results in detail.
Locality A

Fig. 7 The roof context in Gvulot mud house. a The preserved wooden
beam (middle of photograph) sandwiched between infill sediments that
accumulated on the white floor surface (below beam) and mud brick
collapse (above beam). Phytolith concentrations (green values; millions
per 1 g sediment) and phosphate concentrations (yellow values; weight %)
show that the wooden roof remains are characterized by slightly elevated
phosphate concentrations relative to the surrounding sediments. b A wider
view showing that the roof wooden beam remains (1) are overlain by
massive wall collapse (2) preserving intact bricks in its lower part, which is
overlain by alternating wind-blown and mud brick decay sediments (3). c
Microphotograph of the roof wooden beam in thin section showing the
cellular structure of the wood tissue associated with degradation features
such as microfauna excrement (1) and humification (blackening) of parenchyma cells (2). Plane polarized light

of cereal phytoliths (350,000–650,000 phytoliths/g sediment dominated by echinate long cells and psilate parallelepiped elongate cells) in association with Bedouin metal

The original barn measured about 2.5×5m. In May 2010,
only two standing walls were present, with the eastern wall
preserved to a height of about 2 m and the western wall
preserved to about 1 m above the present day surface
(Fig. 8a). Both wall stumps are located at the center of small
mounds composed of their own decayed mud brick material.
A trench of about 2.5×0.6 m was excavated traversing the
mud brick western wall from outside into the barn’s interior
(Fig. 8b), to a depth of about 1.3 m below surface. The
trench cut through four courses of mud bricks, leaving the
stone foundation intact and deeper below the barn’s floor.
The barn’s floor was assumed to be located below a layer of
roof tiles that was found only in the eastern part of the trench
where the barn was located. A few centimeters below the
tiles, the natural dark red soil substrate was found.
FTIR analysis of sediments and mud bricks from locality
A reveals that all sediments have similar mineralogical
compositions, including mainly clay (mostly kaolinite) and
quartz (Fig. 9). Micromorphological analysis made it possible to identify anthropogenic activity remains on both sides
of the wall, at different depths. We were informed that,
outside the barn (on the west), a vegetable home garden
used to be present. On the east, inside the barn, the activity
remains included microcharcoal fragments and organic

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

83

Fig. 8 The abandoned barn in locality A, Kranionas. a View of the
locality showing that only partial walls are left standing. The mud wall
on the left is about 5 m long. b The trench excavated in locality A. Note
the stone foundation (middle of photograph) overlain by three to four
courses of mud bricks (seen in the section). The barn is to the left of
this wall. Roof tiles (marked in section) were identified only inside the
barn. The stratigraphy within the barn, from bottom upwards, consists

of a lower red soil covered by roof tiles, which are overlain by an
accumulation of mud brick degradation material. Phytolith concentrations (green values; millions per 1 g sediment) and phosphate concentrations (yellow values; weight %), show very low concentrations in
both parameters in the degraded brick material whereas close to the
barn floor (deduced from the presence of roof tiles) the values are
significantly higher. Scale bar=20 cm

matter. The activity remains inside the barn were associated
with a dark brown bioturbated silty soil layer, which was
overlain by roof tiles. Thus, it appears that the roof remains
lie on the barn’s earth floor. Phytolith and phosphate concentrations in the dark brown soil layer are higher (0.1–0.6
million phytoliths per 1 g sediment and 0.19–0.16 % phosphate) than in sediments associated with the roof tiles (0.003–
0.006 million phytoliths per 1 g sediment and <0.02 % phosphate) as well as in mud brick degradation sediments above
the roof tile layer (0.002–0.01 million phytoliths per 1 g
sediment and <0.02 % phosphate) (Fig. 8b). Phytolith concentrations in mud bricks are low (0.1 million phytoliths per
1 g sediment and <0.02 % phosphate).
The main difference in phytolith morphotypes between the dark brown soil at the bottom of the section
and other sediments that accumulated within the abandoned barn is a slightly higher percentage of grass
inflorescence phytoliths in the dark brown soil relative
to the sediments above (Fig. 10a). The percentage of
leaf/stem phytoliths is similar in all sediment samples.
Cereal phytoliths in this locality are very few, identified
sporadically only in sediments above the dark brown

soil (Fig. 10b). There is no correspondence between
high phytolith concentrations and presence of cereals
in the dark brown soil, identified as the barn’s floor.
It is unclear whether the higher phytolith and phosphate
concentrations in the dark brown soil represent activity
(vegetal storage) remains, vegetal matter from the collapsed roof or both.
Comparing this abandonment context to that at Gvulot mud
house, we observe a similar pattern in which the roof collapsed either directly on the floor or on postabandonment fill
slightly above it, and only after its collapse the surrounding
mud brick walls began to degrade. The microstratigraphic
sequence is thus repetitive—floor, possible thin layer of
postabandonment sediment, roof remains, and degraded mud
brick material. In both abandonment contexts (e.g., Gvulot
and locality A in Kranionas), we observed very low concentrations of phosphate and phytoliths in the floor deposits, but
yet higher than in fill deposits. We note that mud bricks from
Gvulot and Kranionas do not contain significant amounts of
phytoliths despite being tempered with vegetal matter. This
reflects the much higher volume of mineral matter relative to
vegetal temper in the bricks.

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

474
534

1078
1038

3416

1080
1034

84

534
532

1032
1009

3444

1032
1009
915

471

1078

3437

3697
3620

535

469

1078

d

3695
3620

e

469

915

1082
1032

3444

469

1082
1033
1009

3451

f
3697
3620

536

473

g

534
915

3450

b
3697
3620

470

1033
1011
915

1082

3435

3697
3620

534

c

a
3500

3000

1500

1000

500

Wavenumbers (cm-1)

Fig. 9 Representative FTIR spectra of sediments from Kranionas. a
The local red soil in the vicinity of the village showing it is composed
mainly of kaolinite and quartz with their main absorption bands at
1,032 and 1,082 cm−1, respectively. b Mud brick from the abandoned
barn in locality A showing the same composition as the local soil. c
Sediment below the roof tiles in locality A showing similarity to the
local soil spectrum. d Mud brick from the wall surface at locality B
showing minor structural changes in the kaolinite correlating to exposure to about 400–450 °C (cf. Fig. 5b and c; note reduction in absorbance for the bands at 3,965, 3,620, 1,009, 915, and 532 cm−1). e Gray
sediment from the floor of locality B showing that heating at the floor
level did not exceed 400 °C. f Mud brick from the wall surface at
locality C, showing structural changes of the kaolinite correlating to
exposure to about 500–600 °C (cf. Fig. 5d–e). g Black sediment on the
floor of locality C showing structural changes of the kaolinite correlating to exposure to about 450 °C (cf., Fig. 5c)

Locality B
A long (about 12 m) mud brick wall is preserved in the
northern part of this locality, with two shorter walls to its
east and west (Fig. 11a). The walls preserve to a height of

about 2 m. Mud brick degradation by rain is apparent in the
upper part of the walls, forming sharp triangular edges of
mud material without clear brick structure. The middle and
bottom parts of the walls preserve clear brick contacts
(Fig. 11a). The preserved bricks are covered by red and
black hard crusts, possibly as a result of exposure to fire.
A trench of 2×0.5 m was excavated from the center of the
structure to the northern wall to a depth of about 40 cm from
surface, some 20 cm below the local natural red soil on
which the structure was built (Fig. 11b). Above the buried
soil surface, a mixed layer of gray and black sediments with
visible vegetal matter and roof tiles was exposed.
Occasional sintered glassy material fragments were encountered during the excavation. This thin layer (about 5 cm) of
activity remains is covered by topsoil including dense
masses of grass roots from present vegetation. Closer to
the wall, the activity remains are covered by mud brick
material (Fig. 11b).
FTIR analyses of sediments and bricks from locality B
(Fig. 9) show that the mineralogical composition is dominated by clay and quartz. Specific changes in the infrared
spectrum of clays enable the identification of alteration by
heat. Altered clay has been identified in this locality in the
outer crusts of mud bricks and in the gray and black infill
sediments. The degree of change correlates to temperatures
around 400–450 °C (Fig. 5). The local red soil shows no
signs of clay alteration.
Micromorphological analysis from locality B shows that
the red local soil is a Bt horizon (based primarily on the
presence of in situ formation of clay coatings; Fig. 11c).
Gradual compaction towards the uppermost part of the soil
is observed. The most compacted zone is the topmost 1 cm,
including a few subhorizontal planar voids. The topmost
1 mm is a thin green-yellow layer that includes the same
mineral coarse grains as the local soil, but is depleted in clay
and iron (Fig. 11c). The planar voids and vughs below the
iron-depleted layer include iron/manganese oxyhydroxide
hypocoatings, apparently formed by deposition of the
leached-out iron from the depleted layer. The platy structure,
indicative of trampling in this case (e.g., Macphail et al. 2004),
developed synchronically with hydromorphic conditions that
promoted leaching of iron from the topmost part of the soil.
Above the iron-depleted part of the compacted soil, occasional
thin platy fragments of lime plaster (Fig. 11d) are found. The
lime plaster formed following hydration and recarbonation of
the dispersed quicklime that was spread on the enclosure floor.
Above and between the lime plaster fragments, a layer of
microlaminated animal dung, characteristic of stabling, is
found (Fig. 11c topmost part). The indicators for dung in this
layer include the microlaminated organic matter and
phytoliths, and presence of dung spherulites and phosphate
nodules (c.f., Shahack-Gross 2011). Above the compressed
(trampled) dung remains, a layer containing charred dung

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

85

Fig. 10 Phytolith morphotypes at the various localities in
Kranionas. Control natural soil samples outside the village, Mb
A/B mud bricks from the village, MDS mud brick degradation
sediment, TL tile layer, DBS dark brown soil, G&B gray and
black layer, RS red soil, GL gray layer, BL black layer. a Percentages of grass leaf/stem and inflorescence phytoliths. Note the

significant higher values of inflorescence phytoliths in the gray
layer in Locality C. b Percentages of cereal (wheat, barley, and
rye) phytoliths based on multicell abundances. Note the higher
values of cereal phytoliths in the gray and black layers in locality
C, also present in the soil material just below the floor surface
indicating cereals have been trampled into the floor substrate

mixed with burnt plants and degraded mud brick is observed
(Fig. 11e). Macroscopically, this layer includes roof tiles.
Overall, the micromorphological data show unequivocal evidence for stabling of animals at this locality. In addition, it
shows a microstratigraphic sequence that includes from bottom to top: the soil substrate–floor with patches of lime
plaster–patches of laminated livestock dung–roof material
including tiles and charred vegetal matter, and infiltrated
sediment–degraded mud brick sediment. Note that the activity
remains and roof material may be mixed.
Phytolith and phosphate analyses show low concentrations of phytoliths and phosphates in the lower red soil (0.01
million phytoliths per 1g sediment and 0.14 % phosphate)
and in the mud brick degradation sediment above the tiles
(0.02 million phytoliths per 1 g sediments and <0.02 %
phosphate) (Fig. 11b). Phytolith and phosphate concentrations in the gray and black dung layers are significantly
higher (0.2–3 million phytoliths per 1 g sediment and 0.7–
2 % phosphate) as expected (Shahack-Gross et al. 2003;
Tsartsidou et al. 2008) (Fig. 11b). Phytolith morphologies in
the dung layer are dominated by grass-derived phytoliths.

The relative abundance of grass leaf/stem and inflorescence
phytoliths is similar in all sediment types in this locality
(Fig. 10a). Cereal phytoliths of various types (e.g., rye,
barley, and wheat) are present in low percentages in one
sample that originates from the root area of modern vegetation at the top part of the section. This sample also contains
a higher amount of grass inflorescence phytoliths. This
phytolith assemblage is most probably related to modern
vegetal material rather than past human activities. The lack
of cereal phytoliths in the identified dung remains in locality
B indicates fodder based on free ranging (i.e., wild grasses)
and cereal hay (Fig. 10b). Overall, the phytolith and phosphate concentration data aid in identifying the location of
activity remains in locality B but is not useful in determining
the type of activity.
Locality C
Located to the east of locality B (Fig. 12a), the walls of this
barn preserve to a height of about 3 m. Wall degradation
patterns are similar to those observed in locality B, but we

86

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

Fig. 11 a View of localities B
and C, looking north. The length
of the wall in the background is
about 12 m. b The trench opened
in locality B, showing the red
local soil at the bottom, gray and
black thin layer of activity
remains overlain by a layer of
roof tiles, and mud brick
degradation material that
accumulated on top of the tiles
closer to the wall (on the right).
Phytolith concentrations (green
values; millions per 1 g sediment)
and phosphate concentrations
(yellow values; weight %) show
that the thin layer of activity
remains has slightly elevated
values in contrast to the lower
local soil and the upper mud brick
material infill. Scale bar=20 cm.
c Micromorphological thin
section from locality B showing
microstratigraphic details. The
lower red sediment is a Bt soil
horizon on which the stabling
activity took place. Gradual
compaction is observed towards
the floor surface. The topmost
part of the compacted soil is
depleted from iron which forms
coatings on planar voids and
vughs below the depleted surface.
In certain localities, this irondepleted layer is overlain by lime
plaster fragments (d XPL), which
are overlain by microlaminated
animal dung remains (c
uppermost part, and e lower part).
The latter is overlain by
bioturbated sediment that
includes charred vegetal matter
and mud brick degradation
sediments (e upper part, PPL)

note that their higher standing compared to other walls
seems to be due to their relative protection from rain by
large tree canopies (Figs. 11a and 12a). A trench of 1×
0.4 m was excavated from the center of the structure
towards the eastern mud brick wall with a maximum
depth of 0.9 m near the wall (Fig. 12a). As in locality
B, the lower part of the section is composed of local red
soil on which the structure was built. The surface of the
red soil is overlain by a thin (about 1 cm) black layer,
and an about 3-cm thick layer of mixed gray powdery
and black sediments with charred vegetal matter. This
ashy layer is overlain by an about 25-cm thick layer
composed mostly of roof tiles mixed with brown sediments (Fig. 12a and b). Some of the tiles include black

patches and/or a glassy appearance. The uppermost part
of the section is composed of brown sediment, apparently
the decay products of mud bricks sloping down from the
wall to the center of the structure, their thickness ranging
about 10–40 cm.
FTIR analyses of crusts on bricks along the eastern
wall show that alteration of clay minerals due to heating
was different at different heights of the wall, with
temperatures around 400 °C affecting bricks in the
lower and upper parts of the wall while bricks from
the middle part of the wall (about 1.5 m above the
presumed floor) were exposed to temperatures around
500–600 °C (Figs. 9f and 12a). Clay minerals associated with the ashy layer below the roof tiles were also

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

87

Fig. 12 The excavated section and the preserved mud wall in locality C.
a Reconstructed temperatures based on the infrared spectra of clays. Note
that only the outermost few mm have been affected by heat. Scale bar=
20 cm. b Close up showing the red local soil at the bottom of the section,
overlain by a thin (about 1 cm) black layer, and an about 3 cm thick layer
of gray sediment with charred (black) vegetal matter. These are overlain
by about 25 cm thick layer of roof tiles mixed with brown sediments,
which in turn is overlain by mud brick degradation material. Phytolith
concentrations (green values; millions per 1 g sediment) and phosphate
concentrations (yellow values; weight %) show that slightly elevated
values can be found in the gray and black layers in contrast to the lower
soil and the upper decayed mud brick material. Scale bar=20 cm. c Scan

of a micromorphological thin section showing microstratigraphic details.
The upper part of the red soil (d lower right) is compressed and contains
dusty silty clay with trampled-in organic matter. This topmost part of the
floor is overlain by a black layer of charred plant fibers (d middle and e
bottom). A gray ashy layer above the black layer includes decayed
organic matter, dung spherulites and wood ash pseudomorphs (e top).
This layer also includes a dung coprolite (f) associated with ash. g
Microphotograph from the gray layer showing a glassy feature (1; note
the bubbles). h Microphotograph of another part in the gray layer,
showing calcitic wood ash crystals (1) and clay coatings indicative of
postdepositional clay infiltration (2). All microphotographs are in plane
polarized light except for (h), which is in crossed polarized light

exposed to relatively low temperatures (400–500 °C)
during the conflagration event. The local lower red soil
and the upper infill mud brick degradation sediment do
not bear evidence for clay alteration, i.e., they were
exposed to temperatures lower than 400 °C (Fig. 12a).

Micromorphological analysis of the lower part of the
section (Fig. 12c, d) shows that the lower red soil is a
disturbed Bt horizon with iron oxide nodules, clay coatings,
and impregnated pedofeatures (Stoops 2003) similar to the
soil in locality B. The uppermost 1 mm of the soil surface is

88

composed of compacted fine grained dusty silty clay and
organic vegetal matter that was trampled into the barn’s
floor during activity (Fig. 12d). In this thin activity layer,
the lower part of the plant remains is preserved in its organic
form, while their upper part has been charred (Fig. 12d).
These charred plant remains are overlain by the thin black
layer that is composed entirely of charred vegetal matter
(Fig. 12c–e). These features represent the earthen floor of
the barn with its activity remains. The gray ashy layer above
includes decayed organic matter, dung spherulites, and
wood ash pseudomorphs (Fig. 12e). This layer also includes
a whole ashed dung coprolite (Fig. 12f), blackened grass
phytoliths with a melted appearance, and silicate glassy
phases that may be attributed to partial melting of roof tile
fragments (Fig. 12g, h). All these features indicate exposure
to very high temperatures. Overall, the micromorphological
data show a microstratigraphic sequence that includes from
bottom to top: the soil substrate–floor with trampled-in grass
fibers–black charred vegetal layer–gray ashed vegetal and
dung material–roof tiles and infiltrated sediment–degraded
mud brick sediment. Note that the activity remains and roof
material may be mixed in the gray ash layer.
Phytolith and phosphate analyses from locality C show
similar patterns as in locality B (Fig. 12b), i.e., low amounts
of phytoliths and phosphates in the lower red soil and the
upper brown mud brick degradation sediment (0.03-0.2
million phytoliths per 1 g sediment and <0.02–0.2 % phosphate). The thin black layer in contact with the floor contains low concentrations of phytoliths and moderate concentrations of phosphates (0.04–0.4 million phytoliths per 1 g
sediment and 0.3–0.7 % phosphate), while the gray ashy
layer above it contains high concentrations of phytoliths and
phosphates (1.0–8.5 million phytoliths per 1 g sediment and
0.6–1.1 % phosphate). Phytolith morphologies in the black
and gray layers are dominated by grass-derived phytoliths.
The relative abundance of grass leaf/stem and inflorescence
phytoliths is similar in all sediment types in this locality,
except for one sample originating from the gray layer that
has significantly higher amount of inflorescence phytoliths
(Fig. 10a). Cereal phytoliths of barley and wheat are present
in low percentages, except for three samples that originate
from the gray and black layers (Fig. 10b). As in locality B,
the phytolith and phosphate concentration data here aids in
identifying the location of activity remains. Moreover, in
locality C, phytolith morphological data pinpoints the primary activity of cereal storage.
Localities B and C are interpreted together as they were
abandoned following the same conflagration event.
Although the localities differ in their original function, both
show similar depositional patterns. Burning intensity and
locations were reconstructed based on the fingerprinting of
clay alteration with infrared spectroscopy. The hard crusts
on bricks are clearly the product of heat alteration. While

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

bricks in the wall in locality B show alteration at relatively
low temperatures (not higher than 450 °C), bricks along the
wall in locality C were exposed to similarly low temperatures in the lower and uppermost part of the wall, but higher
temperatures were recorded in the middle part of the wall
(around 500–600 °C). We interpret these observation to
indicate that where large amounts of organic matter were
stored (i.e., locality C barn) flames reached higher onto wall
faces, and as there was relatively more fuel in locality C, the
intensity of fire was stronger as is evident from clay alteration temperature reconstructions, as well as the presence of
larger amounts of macroscopic glassy materials (sintered
roof tiles?) in the conflagration debris. The ashy layers
contain microscopic materials and features that indicate
exposure to different temperature regimes, e.g., an ashed
dung pellet alongside partially melted phytoliths and roof
tiles. We interpret this to be the result of mixing of floor
material burning in situ with disintegrating roof material
during the conflagration process. Later infiltration of
unburnt clay in the form of clay coatings is present in the
ashy layer as well. FTIR analysis of these portions of the
deposit contain unheated clay and could be interpreted as
unaffected by fire.
We note that while clay alteration was observed on the
wall bricks, decayed brick material that covers the conflagration remains does not show signs for clay alteration by
heat. Indeed, we noted that clay alteration was evident only
as thin (1–2 mm) crusts on brick surfaces; thus, we expect
that when a burnt wall degrades and small amounts of
altered clay mix with the larger volume of degraded
unaltered brick material, the end product is dominated by
nonaltered clays. We note that the formation of hard crusts
on the inner face of burnt walls may promote their preservation relative to unburnt walls.
While infrared analyses of bulk sediments of the floor
surface and ashy accumulation above it, in both localities,
show mild alteration of clay (about 400–500 °C), micromorphological analyses enable to disentangle the various
stages of the process. The disintegration of roof material
and its settling down on the floor during the conflagration
probably contributes to sealing of the floor material from
oxygen and high temperatures, thus promoting carbonization of vegetal matter at the floor level and ashing of the
same vegetal matter higher up in the accumulation of debris.
Field observations show that the roof in both localities
collapsed directly on the floor with its activity remains. We
note that dung was identified in the barn, and upon further
conversation with Mr. Lovatsis, we learned that young
lambs were kept in warm barns in their first weeks of life.
Phytolith and phosphate concentrations have been found as
useful tools for identifying layers of activity remains.
However, for specific identification of the type of activity,
it is important to use other methods. In locality B, the

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

89

stabling activity could have been identified only through
micromorphology, while at locality C, the cereal storage
activity could have been identified only through phytolith
morphotype analysis.

implies that the use of microstratigraphic techniques is crucial for archaeological studies focusing on activity remains.

Archaeological implications

Criteria and methods for identification of floors were extensively published (e.g., Boivin 2000; Courty et al. 1989;
Davidson et al. 1992; Goldberg and Macphail 2006;
Karkanas and Efstratiou 2009; Macphail et al. 2004;
Matthews et al. 1997; Milek 2012). Once the locations of the
roof and floor are approximated at an archaeological site, the
sediments in between can be studied to search for activity
remains. Our results show that this is not an easy task and that
a variety of microstratigraphic (geoarchaeological) methods is
needed to obtain as full information as possible. First, we show
that due to the formation of a closely associated floor–roof
complex, microscopic remains regarded primarily as activity
remains may in fact derive from a mixture between floor and
roof assemblages. Differentiation between roofing material and
activity remains is especially complicated in contexts where the
same vegetal matter is used for both, as for example, it was
shown by Tsartsidou et al. (2008) that rye serves both for
thatching roofs and is stored under such roofs to fodder animals, or when vegetal matting was placed on a floor.
In abandonment contexts, we observed that identification
of the floor–roof complex is more difficult than in conflagration contexts, despite the use of a multitude of
microstratigraphic methods. The floor was difficult to identify (unless it was clearly constructed), the layer of activity
remains could not be easily separated from the roof remains,
and the activity remains did not bear an unequivocal signature for the type of activity. In the Gvulot mud house, where
planned abandonment took place, phosphate and phytolith
concentrations from sediments sampled in about 20 localities directly on the house’s floor were negligible. Thus, we
could not identify activity remains using a variety of microscopic techniques, except for one small area where cereals
seem to have been present. In Kranionas, relatively high
concentrations of phytoliths and phosphates in locality A
indicate the location of activity remains, but as phytolith
morphologies are mostly from wild grasses, and phosphate
concentrations are lower than 0.2 %, this context cannot be
interpreted as a barn.
In the conflagration contexts in Kranionas, the stratigraphic sequence was much clearer, but interpretational
issues arise. In locality B, dung remains have been identified, but these rested directly on lime plaster. In an archaeological context, such an association cannot be easily
interpreted—either that the plaster and dung are synchronous and the dung represents the original activity or that the
plaster represents an original surface and the dung accumulated during secondary or postabandonment activity. Indeed,

In abandonment contexts, archaeologists face great challenges in identifying primary activity remains (Ascher
1968; Cameron and Tomka 1993; Lange and Rydberg
1972; Schiffer 1972, 1976, 1985, 1987; Stevenson 1982;
Wood and Johnson 1978; Ziadeh-Seely 1999). In this study,
we noted that, in all case studies presented here, the activity
remains are “sandwiched” between the floor and roof of the
studied mud structure (Figs. 7, 8, 11, and 12). This highlights the importance of identifying not only floors but also
roofs in the archaeological record. Below, we discuss
criteria by which roofs may be identified in archaeological
contexts where building with mud was practiced, based on
several independent lines of evidence including macroscopic field observations and microscopic analyses. In addition,
we discuss the implications of roof identification to the
study of activity remains on floors.
Identification of roofs in mud brick building contexts
While identification of floors has been given a lot of attention in archaeology, identification of roofs was neglected.
Roof material is difficult to identify archaeologically because in most nonmonumental archaeological structures
predating the Roman period, fired clay tiles are not
expected. This is most probably not only because vegetal
roofs are not preserved macroscopically but also because no
systematic studies have been carried out in order to understand where, in an archaeological sedimentary sequence,
roof remains should be sought. The outcome is that roofs
are nonexistent in most excavation reports, unless charred
beams or an occasional pattern on mud that is provisionally
interpreted as “reed impressions” have been identified (e.g.,
Balbo et al. 2012; Stevanovic 1997). Here, we show that
roof remains, in either abandonment or conflagration contexts, should be sought just above the floors, on milli- to
centimeter scales. In addition, we show that, in mud brick
structures, once the roof collapsed, wall degradation is accelerated (e.g., in locality A the wall almost flattened in
about 10 years after roof collapse). Thus, collapsed roof
material is sealed by mud brick debris. We suggest that roof
remains should be sought close to floors, under accumulations of degraded mud brick wall material. Criteria and
methods for identification of degraded mud brick wall material can be found in Friesem et al. (2011; in preparation).
The expected close proximity of roof remains to floors

Difficulties and complications in identification of primary
activity remains

90

the practice of dispersing quicklime on the surface of the
enclosure of locality B was rather unexpected as lime plastered floors are commonly assumed by archaeologists to indicate special preparation, while in this case, the activity was
rather mundane. In locality C, dung remains have been identified mixed with large amounts of vegetal matter. Phytolith
analysis indicated the presence of cereals alongside wild
grasses. In an archaeological context, this case would too have
two optional interpretations—either a barn and enclosure at
the same place or an enclosure only as livestock may be
foddered by both wild grasses and cereals. In these two cases,
based on the ethnographic information, we know that the first
interpretations presented for each locality are the correct ones.
However, were these finds identified in an archaeological
contexts, we would not be able to determine without a doubt
which of the two interpretations is correct. We do note though
that the majority of indicators in each locality support their
original use, while maintenance and/or inconsistent activities
add minor “noise” in the form of small fragments of lime
plaster in locality B and a few dung pellets in locality C. Our
results show that there is no one method that can be applied to
all types of contexts in order to elucidate types of activities. In
locality B, the stabling activity is identified only through
micromorphology, while in locality C, cereal storage is identified solely on the basis of phytolith morphotype analysis.
The identification of iron leaching in relation to hydromorphic conditions in locality B seem to be related to the
function of the floor for animal stabling because such conditions have not been identified in the other two floor
contexts. Macphail et al. (2004) noted that liquid animal
waste in stables created anaerobic and acidic conditions that
promoted phosphatic crust formation and leaching of dung
spherulites. Milek (2012) noted localized formation of ironbearing authigenic minerals (siderite and vivianite) under
reducing conditions in the floor deposits in a sheephouse. It
is possible that iron mobilization and reprecipitation could
be used as an indicator for subsurface conditions within
animal pens.
Lastly, in both abandonment and conflagration contexts,
we note that activity remains deposited on the floors result,
after degradation, in very thin layers (milli- to centimeter
thick) irrespective of the length of occupation. This is the
result of human maintenance practices. The cleaning practice
of the animal enclosure in locality B (two to three times per
year) and the barn (once a year) result in little deposition of
activity remains over 50 years of use (see also Milek 2012).
Roofs and formation processes in domestic contexts
The results of this study show that roofs have a major role in
the degradation process of mud brick structures and, at the
same time, in the preservation of activity remains on living
floors. As long as the roof is intact, primary as well as

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

secondary activities may take place on the floor of any given
structure. Rapid collapse of roofs followed by rapid degradation of mud brick walls are key processes for preservation
of original activity signatures, macroscopic as well as microscopic. This is illustrated in the conflagration contexts
studied here. Theoretically, rapid burial due to human demolition will also result in preservation of floor deposits.
Formation processes are more complicated where a lag in
time exists between actual abandonment and roof collapse.
Such lags in time make it possible for secondary activities to
take place over the original activity signatures and for natural materials, such as dust and vegetation, to accumulate
and mix with the primary and/or secondary use remains.
This sequence of events is illustrated in the two abandonment contexts studied here. Thus, original activity remains
are better preserved in contexts of fast roof collapse such as
catastrophic events of conflagration, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, and flash floods.
As roofs protect mud walls from degradation, roof collapse is normally followed by accelerated mud wall degradation. In Gvulot, immediately after the roof collapse, there
is evidence for major wall collapse (Fig. 7). We note that the
rate of mud wall decay would be different in different
climatic areas. Due to the aridity of the Gvulot area, wall
stumps survived for 60 years to a height of about 2 m in
certain places. For comparison, mud brick degradation material reached 1 m height over the floor in Gvulot in a matter
of 60 years postabandonment (with about 50 % of it originating from wind-blown sand), while in locality A in
Kranionas, it reached the same thickness in about 10 years
without any contribution of wind-blown sediments.
The faster the degradation of mud walls, the better
chances for activity remains to be preserved in situ. This
may be the reason why geoarchaeological signatures for
activity remains were clearer in Kranionas locality A relative to Gvulot. Overall, better chances of preservation of
activity remains are expected in fast roof collapse events at
temperate climatic regions, i.e., fast roof collapse seals
activity remains in situ, and fast wall degradation rapidly
disconnects activity remains from oxygen and thus from
complete degradation.

Conclusions
Microstratigraphy is invaluable for identifying the location
of floors, roofs, and activity remains that are sandwiched
between them. Ethnoarchaeological field work in abandoned mud brick settlements, coupled with microscopic
analytical methods, sheds light on the complexity of these
formation processes and suggests ways for better understanding and interpreting archaeological contexts. We show
that roofs collapse directly on floors and thus seal activity

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92

remains (primary and/or secondary) deposited on and within
the floors. The manner by which a roof collapses, whether
immediately or long after structure abandonment, determines how well activity remains will be preserved. This,
together with floor maintenance practices, greatly affects the
ability to identify original activities in archaeological
contexts.
We have shown that, once roofs collapse, mud walls are not
protected from the elements, and therefore, their degradation
is enhanced, resulting in accumulation of mud brick degradation material on top of the collapsed roof. This indicates that
an archaeological stratum should thus be identified based on a
stratigraphic sequence as follows: floor–activity remains–
roof–sediment from degraded mud walls. This stratigraphic
sequence was observed in both abandonment and conflagration contexts. We note that the direct contact between vegetal
floor activity remains and vegetal roof remains may be obscured even microscopically, resulting in analysis of mixed
floor–roof vegetal assemblages.
Overall, this research emphasizes the importance of roof
identification for reconstruction of human activities and for
understanding site formation processes. Such identification
can only be achieved by careful microarchaeological study
of archaeological sedimentary sequences.
Acknowledgments We are grateful to Mr. and Mrs. Lovatsis, who let
us into their former and present houses with generous hospitality,
without whom the project in Kranionas could not have been carried
out. We are also indebted to Dan Gazit without whose guidance the
excavation in Gvulot mud house could not have been conducted. We
would like to thank those who helped us in the excavation at Gvulot:
Itamar Ben Ezra, Efrat Bocher, Dan Cabanes, Maite Cabanes, Shira
Gur-Arieh, Noa Lavi, and Aren Maeir who contributed the equipment.
This research was funded by a grant from the Israel Science Foundation, Focal Initiatives in Research in Science and Technology (grant no.
527/09 to R. Shahack-Gross), and the Kimmel Center for Archaeological Science at the Weizmann Institute. Finally, we thank Steve Weiner
for his helpful comments and support, and the two anonymous reviewers for their useful suggestions.

References
Albert RM (2000) Study of ash layers through Phytolith analyses from
the Middle Paleolithic levels of Kebara and Tabun caves.
Dissertation, University of Barcelona
Albert RM, Weiner S (2001) Study of Phytoliths in prehistoric ash layers
from Kebara and Tabun caves using a quantitative approach. In:
Meunier JD, Colin F (eds) Phytoliths: applications in earth sciences
and human history. A.A. Balkema, Lisse, pp 251–266
Albert RM, Lavi O, Estroff L, Weiner S, Tsatskin A, Ronen A, LevYadun S (1999) Mode of occupation of Tabun Cave, Mt Carmel,
Israel during the Mousterian Period: a study of the sediments and
phytoliths. J Archaeol Sci 26:1249–1260
Ascher R (1968) Time’s arrow and the archaeology of a contemporary
community. In: Chang KC (ed) Settlement archaeology. National
Press Books, Palo Alto, pp 43–52

91
Balbo AL, Iriarte E, Arranz A, Zapata L, Lancelotti C, Madella M,
Teira L, Jimenez M, Braemer F, Ibanez JJ (2012) Squaring the
circle: social and environmental implications of Pre-Pottery
Neolithic building technology at Tell Qarassa (South Syria).
PLoS One 7:e42109
Bankoff A, Winter F (1979) A house-burning in Serbia. Archaeology
32:8–14
Berna F, Behar A, Shahack-Gross R, Berg J, Boaretto E, Gilboa A,
Sharon I, Shalev S, Shilstein S, Yahalom-Mack N, Zorn JR,
Weiner S (2007) Sediments exposed to high temperatures:
reconstructing pyrotechnological processes in Late Bronze and
Iron Age strata at Tel Dor (Israel). J Archaeol Sci 34:358–373
Boivin N (2000) Life rhythms and floor sequences: excavating time in
rural rajasthan and neolithic Catalhoyuk. World Archaeol 31:367–
388
Boivin N (2001) 'Archaeological science as anthropology': time, space
and materiality in rural India and the ancient past. Dissertation,
University of Cambridge
Brooks RL (1993) Household abandonment among sedentary plains
societies: behavioral sequences and consequences in the interpretation of the archaeological record. In: Cameron CM, Tomka SA (eds)
Abandonment of settlements and regions: ethnoarchaeological and
archaeological approaches. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 178–187
Bullock P, Fedoroff N, Jongerius A, Stoops G, Tursina T (1985)
Handbook for soil thin section description. Waine Research,
Wolverhampton
Cameron CM, Tomka SA (1993) Abandonment of settlements and
regions: ethnoarchaeological and archaeological approaches.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Canaan T (1932–3) The Palestinian Arab house: its architecture and
folklore. J Palestine Orient Soc 12–13:223–247; 1–83
Courty MA, Goldberg P, Macphail R (1989) Soils and micromorphology in archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Dalman G (1928–42) Arbeit und sitte in Palästina. Bertelsmann,
Gütersloh
Davidson DA, Carter SP, Quine TA (1992) An evaluation of micromorphology as an aid to archaeological interpretation.
Geoarchaeology 7:55–65
Friede HM, Steel RH (1980) Experimental burning of traditional
Nguni huts. Afr Stud 39:175–181
Friesem D, Boaretto E, Eliyahu-Behar A, Shahack-Gross R (2011)
Degradation of mud brick houses in an arid environment: a
geoarchaeological model. J Archaeol Sci 38:1135–1147
Gazit D (1986) The Besor region. Ministry of Education and Culture,
Tel-Aviv
Gazit D (2000) Settlements processes in the Besor region in the days of
the sultan Abed Elhamid the 2nd. In: Schwartz J, Amar Z, Ziffer I
(eds) Jerusalem and the Land of Israel, Arie Kindler volume.
Ingeborg Rennert Center for Jerusalem Studies and Eretz-Israel
Museum, Tel-Aviv, pp 183–186
Gé T, Courty MA, Matthews W, Wattez J (1993) Sedimentary formation processes of occupation surfaces. In: Goldberg P, Nash DT,
Petraglia MD (eds) Formation processes in archaeological context. Prehistory Press, Madison, pp 149–163
Goldberg P, Macphail R (2006) Practical and theoretical
geoarchaeology. Blackwell, Oxford
Goldberg P, Whitbread I (1993) Micromorphological study of a
Bedouin tent floor. In: Goldberg P, Nash DT, Petraglia MD
(eds) Formation processes in archaeological context. Prehistory
Press, Madison, pp 165–188
Goodman-Elgar M (2008) The devolution of mudbrick:
ethnoarchaeology of abandoned earthen dwellings in the
Bolivian Andes. J Archaeol Sci 35:3057–3071
Gordon DH (1953) Fire and the sword: the technique of destruction.
Antiq 27:149–152

92
Healan DM (2000) What a dump! rapid abandonment as seen from the
perspective of nonrapid impermanent abandonment at Tula,
Hidalgo. Mayab 13:103–107
Joyce AA, Johannessen S (1993) Abandonment and the production of
archaeological variability at domestic sites. In: Cameron CM,
Tomka SA (eds) Abandonment of settlements and regions:
ethnoarchaeological and archaeological approaches. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 138–153
Karkanas P, Efstratiou N (2009) Floor sequences in neolithic Makri,
Greece: micromorphology reveals cycles of renovation. Antiq
83:955–967
Katz O, Cabanes D, Weiner S, Maeir AM, Boaretto E, Shahack-Gross
R (2010) Rapid Phytolith extraction for analysis of Phytolith
concentrations and assemblages during an excavation: an application at Tell es-Safi/Gath, Israel. J Archaeol Sci 37:1557–
1563
Lange FW, Rydberg CR (1972) Abandonment and post-abandonment behavior at a rural Central American house-site. Am Antiq 37:419–
432
Macphail RI, Cruise GM, Allen MJ, Linderholm J, Reynolds P (2004)
Archaeological soil and pollen analysis of experimental floor
deposits; with special reference to Butser ancient farm,
Hampshire, UK. J Archaeol Sci 31:175–191
Madella M, Alexandre A, Ball T (2005) International code for
phytoliths nomenclature 1.0. Annals of Botany 96:253–260
Mallol C, Marlowe FW, Wood BM, Porter CC (2007) Earth, wind, and
fire: ethnoarchaeological signals of Hadza fires. J Archaeol Sci
34:2035–2052
Matthews W, French CAI, Lawrence T, Cutler DF, Jones MK (1997)
Microstratigraphic traces of site formation processes and human
activities. World Archaeol 29:281–308
Mcintosh RJ (1974) Archaeology and mud wall decay in a WestAfrican village. World Archaeol 6:154–171
Mcintosh RJ (1977) Excavation of mud structures—experiment from
West-Africa. World Archaeol 9:185–199
Milek KB (2012) Floor formation processes and the interpretation
of site activity areas: an ethnoarchaeological study of turf
buildings at Thverá, northeast Iceland. J Anthr Archaeol 31:119–
137
Namdar D, Zukerman A, Maeir AM, Katz JC, Cabanes D, Trueman C,
Shahack-Gross R, Weiner S (2011) The 9th century BCE destruction layer at Tell es-Safi/Gath, Israel: integrating macro- and
microarchaeology. J Archaeol Sci 38:3471–3482
Rypkema HA, Lee WE, Galaty ML, Haws J (2007) Rapid, in-stride soil
phosphate measurement in archaeological survey: a new method
tested in Loudoun County, Virginia. J Archaeol Sci 34:1859–
1867
Sapirstein P (2009) How the corinthians manufactured their first roof
tiles. Hesperia: J Am Sch Class Stud Athens 78:195–229
Schiffer MB (1972) Archaeological context and systemic context. Am
Antiq 37:156–165
Schiffer MB (1976) Behavioral archaeology. Academic, New-York
Schiffer MB (1985) Is there a "Pompeii Premise" in archaeology? J
Anthr Res 41:18–41
Schiffer MB (1987) Formation processes of the archaeological record.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2014) 6:73–92
Shahack-Gross R (2011) Herbivorous livestock dung: formation, taphonomy, methods for identification, and archaeological significance. J Archaeol Sci 38:205–218
Shahack-Gross R, Marshall F, Weiner S (2003) Geo-ethnoarchaeology
of pastoral sites: the identification of livestock enclosures in
abandoned Maasai settlements. J Archaeol Sci 30:439–459
Shahack-Gross R, Albert RM, Gilboa A, Nagar-Hilman O, Sharon I,
Weiner S (2005) Geoarchaeology in an urban context: the uses of
space in a Phoenician monumental building at Tel Dor (Israel). J
Archaeol Sci 32:1417–1431
Shahack-Gross R, Gafri M, Finkelstein I (2009) Identifying threshing
floors in the archaeological record: a test case at Iron Age Tel
Megiddo, Israel. J Field Archaeol 34:171–184
Shoval S, Yadin E, Panczer G (2011) Analysis of thermal phases in
calcareous Iron Age pottery using FT-IR and raman spectroscopy.
J Therm Anal Calorim 515–525
Singer A (2007) The soils of Israel. Springer, Berlin
Stevanovic M (1997) The age of clay: the social dynamics of house
destruction. J Anthr Archaeol 16:334–395
Stevenson MG (1982) Toward an understanding of site abandonment
behavior: evidence from historic mining camps in the southwest
Yukon. J Anthr Archaeol 1:237–265
Stoops G (2003) Guidelines for analysis and description of soil and
regolith thin sections. Science Society of America, Madison
Terry RE, Fernandez FG, Parnell JJ, Inomata T (2004) The story in the
floors: chemical signatures of ancient and modern Maya activities
at Aguateca, Guatemala. J Archaeol Sci 31:1237–1250
Tsartsidou G, Lev-Yadun S, Efstratiou N, Weiner S (2008)
Ethnoarchaeological study of Phytolith assemblages from an
agro-pastoral village in northern Greece (Sarakini): development
and application of a Phytolith difference index. J Archaeol Sci
35:600–613
Twiss KC, Bogaard A, Bogdan D, Carter T, Charles MP, Farid S,
Russell N, Stevanovic M, Yalman NE, Yeomans L (2008) Arson
or accident? The burning of a Neolithic house at Çatalhöyük,
Turkey. J Field Archaeol 33:41–57
Wasley WW (1957) Highway salvage archaeology by the Arizona state
museum, 1956–1957. Kiva 23:17–19
Weiner S (2010) Microarchaeology: beyond the visible archaeological
record. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Wiencke MH (1989) Change in Early Helladic II. Am J Archaeol
93:495–509
Wikander Ö (1990) Archaic roof tiles the first generations. Hesperia: J
Am Sch Class Stud Athens 59:285–290
Wilshusen RH (1986) Relationship between abandonment mode and
ritual use in Pueblo I Anasazi Protokivas. J Field Archaeol
13:245–254
Wood WR, Johnson DL (1978) A survey of disturbance processes in
archaeological site formation. In: Schiffer MB (ed) Advances in
archaeological method and theory. Academic, New York, pp 315–
381
Ziadeh-Seely G (1999) Abandonment and site formation processes: an
ethnographic and archaeological study. In: Kapitan T (ed)
Archaeology, history and culture in Palestine and the Near East:
essays in memory of Albert E. Glock. Scholars Press, Atlanta, pp
127–150

