Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122
DOI 10.1007/s12520-009-0008-1

ORIGINAL PAPER

Bedding, hearths, and site maintenance in the Middle Stone
Age of Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
Paul Goldberg & Christopher E. Miller &
Solveig Schiegl & Bertrand Ligouis & Francesco Berna &
Nicholas J. Conard & Lyn Wadley

Received: 31 October 2008 / Accepted: 6 April 2009 / Published online: 13 May 2009
# Springer-Verlag 2009

Abstract Micromorphological analysis of sediments from
the Middle Stone Age site of Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa, provides a high-resolution sequence and
evidence of site formation processes of predominantly
anthropogenic deposits. This methodology allows for a
detailed interpretation of individual anthropogenic activities, including the construction of hearths and bedding and
the maintenance of occupational surfaces through the sweep
out of hearths and the repeated burning of bedding. This
analysis also provides a context for evaluating other studies
at the site relating to magnetic susceptibility, paleobotany,
paleozoology, anthracology, and studies of ochre.
Keywords Micromorphology . Organic petrology . Middle
Stone Age . Combustion features . Char . Charcoal . Secretinite

P. Goldberg : F. Berna
Department of Archaeology, Boston University,
Boston, MA, USA
P. Goldberg
e-mail: paulberg@bu.edu
P. Goldberg : C. E. Miller (*) : S. Schiegl : B. Ligouis :
N. J. Conard
Institut für Ur- und Frühgeschichte und Archäologie des
Mittelalters, Abteilung Ältere Urgeschichte und Quartärökologie,
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany
e-mail: christopher.miller@uni-tuebingen.de
L. Wadley
Institute for Human Evolution and School of Geography,
Archaeology and Environmental Studies,
University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa

Introduction
The site of Sibudu has been studied intensively over the last
decade, and numerous in-depth publications have appeared
by specialists in a variety of fields that include lithic
studies, paleobotany, paleozoology, paleomagnetism, and
dating (e.g., Wadley 2006; Wadley and Jacobs 2004, 2006).
Although this work has been meticulous and has been
carefully tied to the fine stratigraphic units recognized
during excavation, results from these studies—as is
generally the case for archaeological excavations—are
somewhat synoptic in nature. In other words, lithostratigraphic units were recognized at the site and materials
collected from them were analyzed. What is underdeveloped, however, is an integration of the finds with the
specific context from which individual objects (e.g., seeds,
charcoal, microliths, and bones) are confined. Are hearths,
for example, composed of woody charcoal, nonwoody
plants (e.g., grasses), or mixtures of both? What is the
arrangement of these combustibles in the fireplace: is
charcoal always at the base of the hearth overlain by ashes,
or are ashes intimately mixed with charcoal? Similarly, are
phytoliths in direct physical association with specific types
of charred remains? Can small gaps be recognized that
attest to lack of occupation that are not apparent in the
field? In other words, examination of the microstratigraphic
context at a microscopic scale has so far not been
adequately addressed here and in many if not most
excavations, particularly where anthropogenic components
are concerned (Courty 2001).
Since the Sibudu deposits are largely anthropogenic, it is
critical to investigate them intact with their original
integrity maintaining the highest possible degree of resolution to resolve even single episodes of human activities. It
is now becoming clear that anthropogenic deposits contain
microscopic information about past human lifeways with

96

equal if not greater value than other macroscopic facets of
the archaeological record typically studied, such as bones,
lithics, and plants (Courty 2001; Goldberg and Macphail
2006; Berna et al. 2007).
The technique of micromorphology is particularly well
suited to provide the basis for microscopic highresolution study of anthropogenic sediments and the
human events and activities that led to their formation
(Courty 2001; Courty et al. 1989; Berna and Goldberg
2007). Micromorphological and microscopic analysis
permits an integration of macroscopic and microscopic
evidence into the microstratigraphy and therefore allows
for the contextualization of artifacts and features with a
high degree of resolution.
The aim of this study is to address the site formation
processes—anthropogenic, biogenic, diagenetic, and
geogenic—operating at Sibudu Cave, using micromorphological techniques of intact deposits. Although stress is
placed on teasing out human activities and interpreting the
underlying human behavior responsible for the site’s
primarily human-derived deposits, we will attempt to relate
the micromorphology to results of other specialists at the
site (Wadley 2006) and show how more informed interpretations can be made if the micromorphological data of
intact deposits are taken into account [e.g., geoarchaeology
(Pickering 2006); magnetic studies (Herries 2006)].

Fig. 1 Location of Sibudu Cave

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Site setting and stratigraphy
The site of Sibudu is situated within a sandstone cliff
reentrant that overlooks the Tongati River. It is about 40
km north of Durban and 15 km inland from the Indian
Ocean (Figs. 1 and 2; Wadley and Jacobs 2006). The
bedrock is comprised of sandstones of the Natal Group,
which at the site consist of reddish quartz and feldspar-rich
medium sand and some silt (Pickering 2006); clay can be
seen in thin section as an interstitial binder between the
coarser grains.
The stratigraphy has been well described in a number of
papers (Jacobs et al. 2008; Wadley and Jacobs 2004, 2006)
and accompanied by several OSL dates (Table 1). Overall,
however, the deposits are predominantly anthropogenic,
with numerous lenses of ashy and charcoal-rich units that
appear to represent, at least in the field, intact hearths.
Many of these remains of combustion-related units are
lenticular and thus difficult to trace horizontally over
distances of more than tens of centimeters (Wadley 2006),
explaining the discrepancies between the general stratigraphic sequence as presented in Table 1 and the actual
stratigraphic sequence collected within the micromorphological samples, as presented in Table 2. In some areas,
excavators noted both individual circular hearths in outline,
as well as superposed burning episodes, although individual

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 2 Excavation plan of Sibudu cave

events in the field were difficult to distinguish (cf.,
micromorphological results below). Wadley noted,
Generally, hearths and the sediments that separate
them are almost indistinguishable from one another
based on their phytolith content, suggesting that there
may once have been more hearths than are currently
recognisable (Schiegl et al. 2004: 192). Ash may have
been spread and trampled (Wadley 2006: p. 324).

97

unpromoted polyester resin (Advance Coatings, Westminster, MA, USA) and diluted with styrene at a ratio of seven
parts resin to three parts styrene; the mixture was catalyzed
using MEKP. A similar procedure was carried out by S.
Schiegl in Tübingen, but using a different resin, Viscovoss
N 50 S. After gelling, the blocks were heated overnight at
60°C and then trimmed to size for thin sectioning. P.
Goldberg’s slides measured 50×75 mm and were manufactured by Spectrum Petrographics (Vancouver, WA, USA);
those in Germany were somewhat larger (60×80 mm) and
made by Th. Beckmann (Schwülper-Lagesbütel, Lower
Saxony, Germany). All thin sections were ground to a
uniform thickness of 30 µm. The thin sections were analyzed
and described using standard micromorphological nomenclature (Courty et al. 1989; Stoops 2003).
Organic petrography analyses were performed to investigate the organic constituents and especially organic
residues from the combustion features (Berna and Goldberg
2007). These analyses were made on impregnated blocks that
corresponded to the mirror slices employed to make the thin
sections. The surface of the blocks were polished with 1-mm
diamond suspension and with 0.7-μm alumina (Al2O3)
suspension, following techniques developed for coal sample
preparation (Taylor et al. 1998). The blocks were studied
using reflectance and UV microscopic techniques to identify
organic-derived combustion materials not commonly identified in standard micromorphological examination. Reflectance, which is measured as a percentage of incident light
reflected by the components at the polished surface of the
impregnated blocks, reveals the thermal maturity of the
material. Reflectance measurements can therefore be used
to investigate the extent to which organic material has
been heated. Identification and classification of organic
components is based on morphological characteristics. For
a more detailed description of the application of organic
petrographic methods to archaeology and combustion
material, see Schiegl et al. (2004) and Ligouis (2006).

Results
Methods
Undisturbed samples were collected in different excavation
seasons by two of us (S. Schiegl in 2002, P. Goldberg in
2004, and S. Schiegl in 2005; Table 2; Fig. 3). We removed
them either by cutting out blocks and wrapping them tightly
with toilet paper and packaging tape or, where too loose or
unconsolidated, by using plaster bandages to preserve
sample integrity (see Goldberg and Macphail 2003 for
details). Samples collected by P. Goldberg were processed
at the Micromorphology Laboratory, Boston University,
where they were partially unwrapped and oven dried for
several days at 60°C. They were then impregnated with

Micromorphology Micromorphological analysis revealed
not only the mineral and organic components in the deposits
but, as importantly, the fabric of these elements (the total
organization and spatial arrangement of the constituents of
the material), both with regard to themselves and to other
components. Thus, investigation of the composition and
texture, as well as the fabrics in true space, allows us to make
more robust interpretations about where such materials came
from, how they were deposited, and how they were modified
after they were deposited. Below, we present the results of
micromorphological observations in two parts. The first
provides an account of the basic organic and mineral

98

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Table 1 Stratigraphy of Sibudu Cave, after Schiegl and Conard 2006
Strata

Field observations

Iron age sequence
BSV
BSS

Brown silt with vegetal material
Brown sand with stones

Eastern MSA sequence
Co
Bu

Coffee-colored, sandy deposit
Light gray, sandy silt with lots of small roof spalls

LBMOD
MC
Mou, DMou, LMou
Ore
Ore2 and PB
Cad
Pu
RD

Northern MSA sequence
MOD
OMOD

RSp
YSp
BSp
BSp2
SPCA
BL
Or
Mi
SS, Che

Eb
Ma
MY, BO, BP,
P (Iv, BM)
OP
Su, Su2

Thin light-brown lens with white flecks of gypsum
Small white ash lens that does not reach the eastern section wall
Small lenses
Dark-brown silt
Deep hearths called ore 2 and PB belong to ore
Darker-brown deposit in square C2 and beneath this is a small
patch of orange sandy silt, Pu
Small patch of orange sandy silt beneath Cad
RD is an organic-poor gray layer with a great many spalls and
stone tools; it may be a lag deposit adjacent to RSp in some
squares and in place of RSp in the eastern part of the grid,
but the relationship between the two layers is not clear
The youngest layer at the top of the northern sequence; a mottled
brown silty sand with flecks of white ash, gypsum, and charcoal
OMOD below MOD, in squares B4, C2, C3, and C4, is a thick
member comprising a palimpsest of hearths with orange–brown
burnt earth lenses at their bases, black carbonized layers in their
centers, and white, cream, or gray ash crowns
A reddish-brown layer with white chalk-like grains of gypsum
and calcium carbonate; it is present in all but two squares of the
excavation grid and is thus a good marker layer for the site
A discontinuous yellow–beige sandy silt
A brown sandy silt with black and white flecks of charcoal and gypsum
It contains the same brown matrix as BSp, but it contains many
interfingering hearths and ash lenses
A camel-colored or gray–white sand that contains calcium carbonate;
darker deposits fill small pits that may be solution cavities in this layer
A thin discontinuous black lens
It is colored orange to beige
Another black layer; distinguished by gypsum crystals that cling to
its rock spalls
Che is a thin, disjointed, and chestnut-brown fine sand that seems to
be part of layer SS, a stony and partly compacted sand marbled with
yellow, beige, and pink–orange (the deepest layer excavated in the
main part of the excavation grid)
A black, ashy layer
A mahogany-brown silt that rests on several discontinuous layers: MY,
BO, BP, and P
MY looks like SS; BO is a burnt-ochre silt; BP is a brown silt with
white flecks; P is an orange–brown sandy silt with white flecks of gypsum;
the small lenses Iv (white ash) and BM (black ash) are probably parts of a
hearth within P.
A discontinuous, orange sand with crumbs of gypsum and charcoal.
Thin, concreted, gritty layers of sulfur-yellow sand; this color is unique
in the sequence; the two sulfur-colored layers are separated
and underlain by chocolate-colored lenses, Ch and Ch2

Absolute ages
(C14 ages in
italics; OSL ages
in plain text)

960±25 b.p. (Pta-8015),
calibrated to AD
1044–1171
37.1±1.5 ka
36.7±1.7 ka; 42 300±
1 300 b.p. (Pta-8017)
50.4±1.8 ka

49.0±2.0 ka

49.7±1.8 ka
50.3±2.1 ka, 50.2±1.7 ka

48.4±1.7 ka

61.3±2.0 ka

61.5±2.2 ka

56.2±1.9 ka (SS)

64.1±2.9 ka (P)

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

99

Table 1 (continued)
Strata

Ch, Ch2
G1
Y1
B/Gmix,
B/Gmix2,
BL2, BL3
W
BOr
Ymix, YA1,
YA2
DRG
GS/GS2
PGS
RGS, RGS2
LBG, LBG2,
LBG3, LBG4
BS

Field observations

Absolute ages
(C14 ages in
italics; OSL ages
in plain text)

Chocolate-colored lenses
A gray ash in the northeastern corner of square B5
A yellow sandy silt with some spalls
B/Gmix and B/Gmix2 are mottled brown–gray ashy deposits with
some spalls; BL2 and BL3 are dark ash units within B/Gmix

61.6±1.9 ka (Ch2)
59.4±2.4 ka
59.4±2.3 (B/Gmix)

A white ash layer in the northeastern corner of square B5
A deep-brown organic-rich deposit under B/Gmix2
All are yellow ashy silts
A small lens that occurs in only part of the trial trench; it is loose silt
with small rock spalls and it is dark reddish gray (10 YR 3/1)
GX is gray (5 YR 5/1) silty sand with ash and many small rock spalls;
GS2 is a spit to artificially divide this layer
This is loose pinkish-gray sand (5 YR 6/2) with few rock spalls
Loose reddish-gray sand (5 YR 5/2); RGS 2 artificially splits this
thick layer
A series of light brownish-gray layers (10 YR 6/2) that are soft and
silty with a few small rock spalls; LBG 2, LBG 3, and LBG 4 are
arbitrary divisions of LBG; big rocks begin to encroach on the two
squares during the LBG layers
Loose brown sand with rock spalls and many encroaching rocks.
At the base of this layer, a floor of rock stopped excavations; the rock
may be bedrock, but it could be rock fall that can be removed when
squares adjacent to the trial trench are excavated

components that were found in virtually all the slides
examined. The second part considers the arrangement of
these constituents as represented by distinct and recurrent
groups of similar composition and organization; these groups
are designated as microfacies (Flügel 2004).
Components A summary of the micromorphological components is presented in Table 3. Most of these basic components
are found in all samples, although considerable variations
occur in their proportions and organization from layer to layer.
Bone, most of it burnt, was found in all samples. It
usually consisted of sand-sized fragments, sometimes
rounded or subrounded, although angular splinters were
also noted. The bone fragments were sometimes chaotically
distributed throughout the matrix, although in certain
instances they formed beds or specific layers. Frequently,
the bone formed “stringers” of fragments, which had the
appearance of being crushed in place.
Plant materials and derivatives make up the largest
majority of components found in the thin sections. Charcoal,
both woody and fibrous, is abundant, although some pieces
appear only humified, as seen in oblique incident light. Some
woody pieces of charcoal have clearly identifiable structures
typical of woody plants (Kathleen Deckers 2008, personal
communication). The wood usually appears angular but, in

some instances, can also be rounded. The fibrous plant
material usually forms layers of finely laminated material, not
always charred but probably humified or reddened [cf.
(Sievers and Wadley 2008)]. The long fibers, particularly
the charred ones, are commonly found interfingered with or
as isolated stringers within layers of phytoliths.
Phytoliths are also an important component of sediments
at Sibudu, sometimes being the sole component of a layer.
Many different types of phytoliths appear to be represented,
including forms that resemble cells and plant structures.
Many appear to be rod-shaped long cells and cones, which
are typical of sedges (Arlene Rosen 2008, personal
communication). The phytoliths in some cases form
laminated layers (see below, MF type 4), often associated
with charred fibrous material. Layers of nothing but
phytoliths are also found that do not exhibit any lamination
(see MF type 4A). Although these layers of pure phytoliths
are quite striking, phytoliths do occur in most samples,
usually as isolated individuals. However, the amount of
phytoliths and the occurrence of phytolith layers appear to
increase in the upper portion of the sequence at Sibudu.
Some forms of phytoliths found in slides from Sibudu
appear vesicular, resembling “siliceous aggregates” as
described by Schiegl and Conard (2006). These bodies
often appear as isotropic aggregates that incorporate sand-

100
Table 2 List of micromorphological samples collected at
Sibudu Cave

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122
Sample number

Square

Stratigraphic unit(s)

S. Schiegl SAMPLES
SS-1

B4/B5 line (east face of B5)

BL
Or
Che
SS
SS hearth
Eb
BSP
SPCA
Hearth in Or
Mi
B/G Mix2
Pink
WA hearth
YA

SS-2

B5B6/A5A6 line (north face of B5 and B6)

SS-3

B4/B5 line (east face of B5)

SS-4

North face of B4

SS-5
SS-6

North face of B4
B4/B5 line (east face of B5)

SS-Daga Floor
P. Goldberg SAMPLES
SIB-04-1

Samples designated SS were
collected by Solveig Schiegl in
2002 and 2005. Samples designated PG were collected by Paul
Goldberg in 2004

NA
B4/B5 line

SIB-04-2

B4/B5 line

SIB-04-4

B4/B5 line

SIB-04-5

B4/B5 line

SIB-04-6

North face of B4

sized grains of quartz and other phytoliths. Although found
in other contexts as individual grains, they are also often
found within layers composed almost solely of phytoliths,
which are often laminated (MF type 4). The association of
these aggregates with phytoliths retaining their original
structure suggests that they are detrital and are not formed
by melting of phytoliths (Schiegl et al. 1996; Schiegl and
Conard 2006) but are probably organically formed.

BUYA
YA2
BUYA2
RSP
BSP
OMOD
Ma/BO
BM
Pox
Iron Age burnt hut floor
Pinkish-gray sand
Gray sand 2
Gray rocky
Hearth in gray rocky
Midnight
Orange under midnight
Chestnut
SS
Ebony
Ebony hearth
Pox
O[range] pox
B[rown] pox
G1
RSP

In addition to phytoliths, other microbotanical remains
were found in the slides from Sibudu, including spores
and diatoms. The spores (usually 20–30 µm in diameter)
were found in only one slide (SS-5C) and generally
occurred within localized domains. Diatoms were found in
just one slide (SS-5A) and occurred within a clast of
orange clay, probably originating from the Tongati river
valley.

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

101

Fig. 3 Field photos showing
sample locations (see Table 2).
a Location of samples SIB-04-5
and SS-6 along the B4/B5 line.
b Location of samples SIB-04-2
and SIB-04-1 along the B4/B5
line. c Location of samples SS4, SS-5, and SIB-04-6 at the
north face of B4

An interesting component found in only one slide (SS6A) are rounded 1.5-mm-diameter aggregates of fine
organic matter, containing fragments of charcoal, bone,
and quartz silt. They are found within a single layer, and we
interpret them as small mammalian excrement or fecal
pellets.
The clastic components of the sediment at Sibudu span
the range of size from centimeter-sized pieces of local
bedrock to silt and clay. The larger clasts (1 to 2 cm) found
in the samples are typically elongated and angular, usually
oriented parallel to the bedding surface, although vertical
and subvertical clasts were noted in some layers. The clasts
consist of slightly metamorphosed sandstone and siltstone,
representing roof fall from the local bedrock of the rock
shelter. Some components within this size class were
composed of cryptocrystalline silica and probably are lithic
artifacts that were included in the sample block.

Sand- to granule-sized pieces of weathered and unweathered volcanic rock were also found in some samples. These
appear to be derived from doleritic dikes which crosscut the
metamorphosed sand and siltstone bedrock of the region
(Pickering 2006).
A sand- and silt-sized component of the sediment is noted
in all samples. The sand is usually angular to subangular,
although some grains exhibit subrounding. The sand usually
consists of quartz or feldspar, although sand-sized pieces of
mica and clay (both fresh and weathered) were also present.
Like the larger sand- and siltstone clasts, the sand-sized grains
were derived from the physical and chemical deterioration of
the rock shelter wall. It is possible that some grains were
“tracked in” to the rock shelter by humans or animals,
although this was probably a relatively minor process.
Silt grains occur as a small component of all samples
and are usually very fine (20–30 µm), consisting mostly

102

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Table 3 Components identified in thin section from micromorphological samples from Sibudu Cave
Component

Description and comments

Representative thin sections

Bone (and teeth)

Generally sand to centimeter-sized pieces
Rounded to subrounded; angular splinters
Dark brown to yellow to white in color
Burned and unburned; some calcined
Bedded and chaotically distributed; in some cases,
fragments are concentrated in layers or broader
bands (e.g., SS-5B) and in stringers
Locally crushed in place, with no displacement

All; SS-4; SS-6B

Sand-sized up to centimeter-sized
Varies from nondescript pieces and chunks to those
with clear vessel and tracheid structures
Mostly charred, but many appear only to be humified or
reddened (particularly as seen in oblique incident light—OIL)
Mostly angular but some are clearly well rounded
Isolated pieces to bedded ones
Thin fibrous grains of charred plant material generally aligned
within layers but also distributed throughout finer-grained
matrix material (of varied composition)
Mostly charred but many appear only to be humified or reddened
(particularly as seen in OIL)
Commonly interfingers with or occurs as thing stringers in
phytolith layers
Circular brown in color
Generally 20 to 30 µm across
Occur only in certain slides (e.g., SS-5C)

SS-6B

Charcoal: wood

Charcoal: fibrous

Spores

Diatoms

Phytoliths

Siliceous aggregates

Clastic elements
Roof fall and
lithic artifacts

Volcanic rocks

Dispersed throughout sediment but commonly occur as local
domains in certain slides and regularly in concentrated zones
Occurs predominantly in one slide within chunk of orange clay,
likely derived from river valley
Several unidentified types
Many types
Occur as microfacies type 4: microlaminated phytoliths with little
or virtually no mineral or organic matrix
Also occur as in microfacies type 4A where they are nonlaminated
and mixed with rock fragments, charcoal, and crushed bone
Consist of many plant types (nonidentified), including cells and
vesicular siliceous types, which may be taken for “siliceous aggregates”
Illustrated in Schiegl et al. (2004) but intact presence as grains within
thin sections is not clear
Commonly occur as clear isotropic aggregates in XPL that contain
phytoliths and silt-sized quartz grains
Seem to be detrital or organically formed
Are commonly found within layers of phytolith ashes that are not melted;
thus, the siliceous aggregates at Sibudu are probably not produced by
the melting of phytoliths
Possibly equivalent to “bubbly” siliceous grains with vesicular structure
[c.f., Schiegl et al. (2004) Figs. 6 and 7]
Generally elongated and quite angular chunks of slightly metamorphosed
sandstone and some siltstone
1–2 cm across
Generally parallel to bedding although in some cases clasts are vertical
Generally sand- to granule-sized
Weathered and unweathered dolerite and other volcanic rocks occurring
as traces within some samples

SS-5B; SS-5C

SS-5C

SS-5A

SS-5B; SS-5C;
SS-6A

SS-5D

Lithic artifact:
SS-5C
Eboulis: SS-5A;
SS-5C
SS-5D

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

103

Table 3 (continued)
Component
Silt

Sand

Clayey aggregates
from river valley

Description and comments

Representative thin sections

Occurs in trace amounts in most samples
Very fine-sized, typically ∼20–30 µm
• Mostly quartz, but some traces of mica, and even fewer
heavy minerals
Predominantly quartz and feldspar, but other individual grains
of minerals from bedrock also observed (mica, clay), which are
both fresh and weathered
Angular to subangular; much fewer subrounded
Derived from breakdown of shelter wall and ceiling; possibly
some tracking in of grains but relatively minor
Amount of quartz variable from sample to sample but relatively
higher amounts of sand in upper part of some samples
(e.g., sample SS-4)
Occurs in small (<3%) amounts in most samples
Variable size, from fine sand up to several millimeters
Generally rounded and subcircular shape
Comprised of reddish clay some with inclusions of quartz silt;
in one case (SS-5B), diatoms are found
Most are fire reddened
One large, millimeter-sized grain exhibits strong gleying
(SS-261); a finer clay clast contains diatoms (see above)
Generally scattered but some broadly confined to layers

All

Generally rare at the site, having been subjected to decalcification

Clumps and stringers
of ash: SS-5A
Massive, cemented
ash: SS-567

SS-4

SS-5A; 5B
SS-261
(gleyed donga)

Fine clastic elements
Calcareous ash

Where found, generally as millimeter-sized clumps or as thin
(∼1-mm stringers) or fine (∼10 µm) partially dissolved
crystals/grains of calcite
Because of dissolution, typical rhomb shapes of ashes are relatively
rare (except SS-5A, SS-5C)
In sample SS-567, entire sample is cemented with calcite derived
from ash, which is partially recrystallized or at least masked by
secondary cementation
Most calcite ash is secondarily replaced with microcrystalline
isotropic phosphate (see below)
Found particularly above layer GR but also some traces are found
below GR
Precipitates
Calcite

Phosphate

Gypsum

Generally rare but secondary cementation of ashes (e.g., SS-567)
With secondary cementation of ashes, bones are locally impregnated
with fine (∼10-µm size) calcite
Tends to be more common in SS-567 and SS-569
Diffuse, nondescript areas of thin sections—particularly in areas
between more recognizable materials such as charcoal, phytoliths,
bone, or organic matter—which are isotropic in XPL
In PPL, generally pale yellow to yellow
Locally fill circular voids and spaces of spores (as seen in Schiegl
and Conard 2006, Fig. 2, p. 158)
Phosphatized ash found in most layers and slides
Locally forms crusts on phosphatic ash layers
(e.g., SIB-04A; SS-5C; SS-6B)
Occurs in many slides but seems to be restricted within the
upper part of the stratigraphic section and particularly certain
layers (e.g., LBMOD, MOD, RSp, BSp, P, OP); generally very
low below GR (Schiegl and Conard 2006)

SS-567

Phosphatized
ash: SS-4

SIB-04-4B,
SIB-04-4C

104

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Table 3 (continued)
Component

Description and comments

Representative thin sections

Overall, with globule, massive displacive shapes that range in size
from sand size to millimeter to centimeter size
Globule-like accumulations are found either as displacive crystal masses or
Can coalesce to form bands or “layered” accumulations (e.g., SIB-04-4B)
Crystal and shape within globules is variable and include:
Microcrystalline type with crystal size <5 µm (SS-4)

SIB-04-5A,
SIB-04-5B
SIB-04-6

Small (∼60–80 µm), lenticular/lozenge shape crystals (SS-5C),
some of which are undergoing dissolution
Mosaic of large (∼0.6 to 1.3 mm) interlocking crystals (SIB-04A)
These commonly replace or overgrow the finer displacive
microcrystalline and lenticular types
Euhedral to subhedral shapes
Miscellaneous
Small mammal excrements

Eggshell
Char

Rounded pellets of burnt bone and reddish fibrous material,
∼1.5 mm in diameter
Contain flecks of charcoal, quartz silt, and slightly coarser angular
splinters of bone in a somewhat porous matrix of finely divided
organic matter that is brown in color
One burnt tablet-shaped fragment from SS-569
Isolated and surrounded by ashy but partially decalcified matrix
Occurs as grains in certain samples
In SS-5C, occurs as vesicular, porous black grain ∼1.2 mm across,
with some fine cracks

SS-6A

SS-569
SS-4; SS-5B;
SS-5C

In SS-5C, occurs as broken finely fissured angular blocks,
∼500–750 µm across

of quartz, although some mica and heavy minerals were
found within this size class. Clay occurs in several samples
but as aggregates usually within the range of fine sand
(>62 µm) to several millimeters in diameter and containing inclusions of silt quartz. They are typically rounded
and subcircular, occurring throughout the matrix as
individual grains but also exhibiting bedding in certain
instances. One large millimeter-sized clay aggregate
exhibits gleying (in sample SS-261). This, along with
the presence of an aggregate of finer clay with diatom
inclusions, suggests that the aggregates are derived from
the local Tongati river valley. The clay aggregates also
resemble clay aggregates found in a sample from a “Daga
floor.” This is an Iron Age trampled floor constructed
from clay brought to the cave from the Tongati River.
Many of the aggregates from the Middle Stone Age
(MSA) layers appear fire-reddened.
Organic constituents by organic petrology Although both
woody and herbaceous charcoal was identified using
standard micromorphological techniques, numerous submillimeter constituents are present in the thin sections and
defy simple identification with standard methods. Organic
petrographic microscopy aided in identifying these constit-

uents and emphasized the complexity and variety of
combusted material present in archaeological features
(Fig. 4).
Organic petrography confirmed that a major organic
constituent of the sediment at Sibudu is charcoal, both
woody and herbaceous. This material can be classified
as “fusinite” and “inertodetrinite” (fusinite is fragments
that are smaller than 20 µm). Both are products of
incomplete burning, or charring, of lignin- or cellulosecontaining tissues (Taylor et al. 1998). Most of the
identifiable charred plant material was derived from
herbaceous plants, with identifiable tissues from leaves,
stems, and roots being the most numerous. Reflectivity
measurements on the charcoal particles have shown
that the reflectance mean values (Ro) range from 1.27%
to 1.40%.
Two types of amorphous organic combustion remains
were identified in samples from Sibudu: a type with a
typically vesicular texture and a type with a cracked
texture. The first type was found as isolated bodies,
subrounded with a diameter of 10 µm to 1 mm, and they
exhibited no evidence of cell structure. Bubbles or
vesicles give the bodies a highly porous nature, and they
are often thin walled. The microstructure of these

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

105

Fig. 4 a Charcoal: high-reflecting wood-derived fusinite. Incident
light, oil immersion. b Charcoal: fusinitized herbaceous tissues
(medium reflecting) and high-reflecting char (bottom right). Incident
light, oil immersion. c Charcoal: leaf-derived fusinite, medium
reflecting. Incident light, oil immersion. d Fat-derived char showing
characteristic random pore distribution. Note the droplet-shaped char
in the upper part of the particle. Incident light, oil immersion. e Char

with charcoal inclusions (white fragment S and inertodetrinite Id).
Incident light, oil immersion. f Thin coating of fat-derived char
surrounding a quartz grain. Incident light, oil immersion. g Secretinite
showing characteristic internal notches and high reflectivity. Incident
light, oil immersion. h Brown–yellow fluorescing resinite with
mineral inclusions. Incident light, fluorescent mode, oil immersion

homogenous or finely heterogeneous isotropic particles
and their droplet-shaped occurrence suggest that these
bodies were originally fluid and that they underwent a
degassing process but have since hardened. These bodies

resemble char and are probably derived from the burning
of flesh or animal fat. The mean reflectance values range
from 0.91% to 2.20%, correlating well with organic
constituents that form by charring (such as fusinite),

106

which are characterized by a high reflectivity (Taylor et
al. 1998).
The second type of amorphous bodies, those with a
cracked structure, can exhibit an oval or rounded form,
although forms with an irregular outline were noted. They
are typically homogenous, isotropic, and 10 to 450 µm in
diameter. Their mean reflectance values range from 0.45%
to 1.96%. These types of bodies are known to the field of
organic petrography as secretinite (ICCP 2001), although
the origin of this material is not totally clear. It is possibly a
by-product of burning resin or gum, derived from trees or
possibly from the burning of seeds.
Nonburnt organic substances were identified through
organic petrology, including resinite, a constituent derived
from plant materials, such as resin, or wax (Taylor et al.
1998). The identification of unburnt resin supports the
hypothesis that the secretinite could be derived from burnt
resin.
Microfacies The sediments at Sibudu are complex and, as
mentioned above, it is in some cases difficult to trace an
individual stratigraphic unit from one profile of the trench
across to another. Such small-scale changes in lithology
reflect different human activities that took place in discrete
places within the cave space. Thus, in order to try to study
the sediments effectively and to characterize and interpret
them, we have opted to employ the concept of microfacies.
Microfacies, as originally conceptualized in geology
decades ago and as currently understood, makes use of
petrographic and palaeontological observations in thin
sections, peels, polished blocks, and rock samples to
describe and infer past sedimentary environments (Flügel
2004); it has been used particularly in carbonate petrology.
Recently, Courty (2001) applied the concept to geoarchaeological settings, particularly those characterized by anthropogenic inputs and modifications, such as those in Near
Eastern tell sites and prehistoric cave deposits. By their
very nature, such archaeological deposits reflect past
human activities, which include depositional and postdepositional modifications, where lithological changes, like at
Sibudu, are common over short horizontal (and vertical)
distances. As a consequence, Courty expanded the range of
stratigraphic observation over a continuum from thin
section to field in order to keep track of and account for
different human activities, which can take place in different
parts of the same site at the same time; these activities leave
different types of deposits and fabrics.
At Sibudu, fine stratigraphic subdivisions were achieved
during excavation (Wadley and Jacobs 2004, 2006) and
represent microfacies as championed by Courty (2001). In
this paper, however, we use microfacies more in the sense
as it was originally conceived: lithological changes within
an individual thin section. Since it is impossible to divorce

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

micromorphological observations from those in the field,
we continually attempt to relate what we see in thin section
to what was observed in the field, at both the site and
regional level.
Below, we present an inventory of microfacies as
identified through microscopic examination of thin sections. The brief descriptions are included with a representative microphotograph of each microfacies type (Fig. 5). A
schematic cartoon illustrating the organization of the
different components and a list of which samples contain
the specific microfacies are included within Table 4, along
with an interpretation of the formation processes associated
with each microfacies, as discussed below.
1. Microfacies type 1, phosphatic—this massive microfacies has a fluffy microaggregated aspect of yellow
apatitic material. It is comprised of layered to very
finely laminated grains, including possibly clay. It
contains phytoliths and woody tissues, with inclusions
of quartz silt and clay papules. It exhibits a possible
phosphatic crust.
2. Microfacies type 2, laminated organic matter—this
type consists of finely laminated fibrous organic material, which varies in color from black (charred) to
reddened (humified?). Inclusions of charcoal, burnt
bone, lithics, éboulis, aggregated sediment from the
river valley (which can be fire-reddened), and phosphatic
grains (e.g., coprolites, reworked phosphatic crusts) can
also occur. These elements can be commonly organized
in variable proportions into stringers (thin lenses).
Two subtypes also occur:
(a) Microfacies type 2A, laminated organic matter
with charcoal—this subtype is the same as
microfacies 2 except that it contains larger clasts
of éboulis, bone (mostly burnt), lithics, woody
charcoal, and rock fragments. Burnt bone and
woody charcoal commonly appear crushed and
form stringers. Larger clasts occasionally are
impressed into the underlying substrate/deposits.
(b) Microfacies type 2B, laminated organic matter
with phytoliths—this subtype is comprised of
finely laminated fibrous organic matter and phytoliths, along with burnt bone that has been heated
to varying degrees; crushed burnt bone forms
surfaces and stringers. In addition, erratic clasts of
river valley sediment are present, some of which
are burned. In some instances, calcite ash is
present but is being dissolved. In sample SS-6A,
gypsum occurs as lozenge shapes, and needles of
gypsum formed on a sandstone clast are ∼1.2 mm
long.
3. Microfacies type 3, massive charcoal—this microfacies
occurs in layers and is composed of massive charcoal;

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

107

or organic matrix; pockets of phosphate and some burnt
bone occur. Phytoliths are of various types.

in some cases, it is associated with rubefied substrates.
Internal organization of material is chaotic. In certain
instances, it occurs with calcareous ashes when they are
not phosphatized.
4. Microfacies type 4, laminated phytoliths—this is a
distinctive and striking microfacies consisting of microlaminated phytoliths with little or virtually no mineral

(a) Microfacies type 4A—in this subtype, the phytoliths are nonlaminated and contain inclusions of
rock fragments, charcoal, and crushed bone; burnt
river valley sediment also occurs.

Fig. 5 Microphotographs of microfacies types. a Microfacies type 1,
phosphatic. b Microfacies type 2, laminated organic matter. Note that
the top of this figure contains some portions of microfacies type 3. c
Microfacies type 2A, laminated with charcoal. Note the crushed bone at
the base of this microphotograph. d Microfacies laminated type 2B with
phytoliths. e Microfacies type 3, massive charcoal. (f) Microfacies type
4, laminated phytoliths. g Microfacies type 4A, nonlaminated phyto-

liths. h Microfacies type 5, homogenous anthropogenic components.
Note the presence of microfacies type 2B at the base of the
microphotograph. i Microfacies type 6, phosphatic and calcareous ash.
Note the calcite rhombs typically associated with plant ash. Microphotograph taken in cross-polarized light. j Microfacies type 6A. k
Microfacies type 7, massive sand. l Microfacies type 8, massive,
compact, very little void space

108

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 5 (continued)

5. Microfacies type 5, homogeneous anthropogenic components—this homogeneous microfacies is composed
of bone, phosphate, and charcoal, with sand- and siltsized quartz grains. These components are completely
mixed, without any layering or concentrations of
individual elements. Particles range from granule size
to silt size. Phytoliths occur throughout and are an
important but not dominant component.

6. Microfacies type 6, phosphatic and calcareous ash—
this is another distinct microfacies. It is rich in
phosphatic and calcareous ash accompanied by active
dissolution of calcite; gypsum crystals occur throughout. Brownish phosphatized plant material—including
phosphate pseudomorphs of ashed plant materials—
occurs, as well as some phytoliths. A phosphatic crust
is present on top of the microfacies in SS-5C.

(a) Microfacies type 5A—same as type 5, but without
phytoliths.

(a) Microfacies type 6A—type 6A is similar to 6, but
ash is more diagenetically altered to the extent that

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

109

Table 4 Microfacies types identified in thin sections from Sibudu with a schematic representation of the facies, a list of thin sections where
present and the proposed interpretation of the microfacies type

calcite is no longer visible and the sediment is
completely isotropic. Phosphatic crusts may be
present.
7. Microfacies type 7, massive sand—this is a massive
sandy microfacies that includes sand-size pieces of
angular burnt bone fragments and pieces of charcoal.
The microstructure is quite granular and open.
8. Microfacies type 8, massive, compact, and very little
void space—this is a homogeneous mixture of most
major components. The bone is fairly angular and

fibrous and woody types of charcoal are present. Large
fragments of river valley sediment are also present. The
fine matrix is mostly phosphatic.

Discussion
Since the majority of components at Sibudu are anthropogenic and because the structuring of these components—as
interpreted from the different microfacies—results directly

110

from humans acting as depositional agents, it is possible to
determine the different human activities occurring at the
site during single and repeated occupations. By differentiating between the structural organization of different
microfacies (Table 4), it is possible to distinguish between
two different types of combustion features.
The first type of combustion feature, referred to here as
hearths, represent the intentional transport of wood or plant
material to the cave for the purpose of burning that material
to produce light or heat. The actual function of these
hearths is not discernable, and is probably not easily
classified—cooking hearth, heating hearth, or a hearth for
light or protection. These hearths could have served any
one of these purposes and most likely served several of
these purposes at any one time during their use.
The second type of combustion feature—the burning of
bedding (Macphail et al. 1997)—may represent a distinct
behavioral practice associated with fire. In this paper, we
chose to use the term “bedding” rather than “mats” to refer
to the laminated fibrous material found in thin section since
“mats” may imply a woven material, which does not appear
to be the case at Sibudu. By using “bedding,” we do not
intend to imply a specific functionality of this material (i.e.,
sleeping). Rather, we see the plant material as a general
surface preparation that could have been used for various
purposes (sleeping, sitting, etc.). The repetitive nature of the
burnt bedding in the sequence and the overwhelming
presence of anthropogenic components and processes
present at Sibudu rule out the possibility that these fires
were started naturally, such as by lightning strikes. One
possibility is that the beds were burned as a result of
coming into close contact with adjacent hearths. While it
seems very likely that some singeing of the beds occurred
during occupation and use of adjacent hearths, it seems
unlikely that the complete ashing of the upper portion of the
beds occurred accidentally. The repetition of burnt bedding
at the site also argues for intentional, rather than accidental,
burning.
Whereas the construction of hearths represents burning
of material with the goal of acquiring fire, either for
cooking, heating, or light, the burning of bedding appears
to be associated with the maintenance of the site and
represents a change in their functionality: while initially
useful as bedding—enough so that they were repeatedly
managed by adding more plant material over time—their
usefulness for the inhabitants of Sibudu cave changed so
that their destruction through fire was deemed necessary.
The actual intent behind the burning of the bedding is most
likely impossible to infer; however, it seems reasonable that
hygienic concerns may have played a role, as older beds
may have attracted vermin or were seen as dirty after
repeated use. In this sense, we would refer to the burning of
bedding as “maintenance fires,” to distinguish these

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

combustion events from the hearths identified in this study.
Cleaning of the site also was inferred at Sibudu by Cain’s
(2005) study of burnt and fragmented bone incorporated in
ash dumps.
A genetic interpretation of microfacies types at Sibudu
Microfacies 1, phosphatic, is found only in one slide (SS6B) and consists of fluffy phosphatic material, with a crust
formed on its upper surface (Fig. 5a). It contains several
inclusions, such as wood fragments, phytoliths, and some
clay papules. The structure of the phosphatic material
suggests that a portion of this microfacies could be derived
from guano, although the inclusion of phytoliths and
woody fibers may hint at an ash component. Even if
present, the ash has long since been phosphatized due to the
presence of guano. The phosphatic crust indicates that the
top of this layer was exposed on the surface for a period of
time (possibly weeks to years), allowing for phosphatization to occur.
Microfacies 2, laminated organic matter, and its various
subfacies types (type 2A, laminated with charcoal and
laminated type 2B with phytoliths) are one of the more
common microfacies types identified at Sibudu (Fig. 5b–d).
It is found in almost every sample collected within the
finely laminated sequence above approximately layer YA2.
The unifying component of microfacies 2 and its subtypes
is laminated fibrous organic material—usually burned but
not always—that in certain cases exhibits signs of humification. Some of this material certainly corresponds to the
herbaceous fusinite identified by organic petrographic
analysis. What differentiates the subfacies of microfacies
type 2 is the inclusion of other components within the
laminated fibrous fabric.
Laminated type 2A with charcoal, for example, usually
contains centimeter-sized pieces of woody charcoal that
often appear crushed, forming stringers along a surface as
defined by the microlaminated organic fibers of the matrix
(Fig. 5c). This subfacies may also contain larger clasts of
éboulis, pieces of chipped stone, bone (typically burned),
and aggregates of river valley sediment. Like the pieces of
woody charcoal, these larger components are often organized parallel to the direction of bedding as defined by the
fibrous organic material. In some cases, particularly with
less robust components, such as burnt bone and river valley
sediment, the inclusions appear crushed and are often
spread out as stringers along a surface. Some larger
components appear to deform the underlying structure of
laminated organic fibers, as if they had been impressed into
the underlying substrate.
Laminated type 2B with phytoliths has the same characteristics as laminated type 2A with charcoal (Fig. 5d). This
subfacies, however, contains phytoliths, often oriented

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

parallel to the bedding direction. Plant ash, although partially
dissolved, has been found in this microfacies based on the
identification of calcite rhombs (Courty et al. 1989; Brochier
and Thinon 2003; Canti 2003). The bulk of this microfacies
consists of laminated fibrous organic matter that does not
have a woody structure (K. Deckers 2008, personal
communication). Because of its long fibrous nature, it seems
that this material consists of herbaceous plants, possibly
some type of sedge, reed, or grass. There is no evidence to
suggest that this plant would have grown naturally in the
rock shelter, and the presence of clay aggregates derived
from the river valley found in association with the laminated
plant fibers implies that the grass or reed was transported to
the cave from the nearby Tongati River by the shelter’s
inhabitants.
The compact and laminated structure of the organic
fibers in this microfacies also suggests that, once brought to
the cave, the grass or reed was subjected to compaction,
most likely through trampling. Further evidence supporting
the interpretation of trampling is seen in the stringers of
charcoal, clay aggregates, and burnt bone that define
horizontal and subhorizontal surfaces on top of and within
the laminated organic fibrous material. Pieces of éboulis
and lithic fragments also define surfaces within the
microfacies. The fact that this grass or reed was transported
to the cave by humans and that once there it was influenced
by human trampling suggests that this microfacies represents a type of constructed bedding. If this is the case, then
Sibudu contains the oldest evidence for constructed
bedding, significantly older than that reported at the openair site of Ohalo in Israel (Nadel et al. 2004).
Often found directly above microfacies type 2 (typically
subfacies laminated type 2B) is microfacies type 4,
laminated phytoliths (because of this association, microfacies type 3, massive charcoal is discussed further below).
This microfacies consists almost exclusively of phytoliths
that are laminated (Fig. 5f). In some instances, pockets of
phosphate are found in the microfacies, as well as burned,
possibly calcined, bone fragments.
Since this microfacies is almost exclusively found
directly above microfacies laminated type 2B (laminated
organic matter with phytoliths), which also contains
phytoliths in addition to stringers of burnt fibrous organic
material, it seems that this microfacies is genetically linked
to microfacies type 2 and its submicrofacies. The laminated
organization of the phytoliths mirrors the laminated
structure of the underlying fibrous organic material and
implies that this microfacies represents a similar depositional process as determined for microfacies type 2. What
seems a likely and reasonable scenario is that the original
organic matter of this laminated layer of sedges, grass, or
reeds was completely combusted, resulting in total
ashing of the organic material. The calcitic ash in this

111

microfacies was transformed through phosphatization, as
evidenced by the presence of a few remnant pockets of
phosphate in this microfacies. The fact that large crystals
of gypsum often form directly below these phytolith
layers provides suggestive evidence for the downward
leaching of CO3- or P-rich solutions. The association between
microfacies 2 and 4 suggests that the sedges, grass, or
reeds that were brought into the cave for bedding were
usually burned and probably by humans when they no
longer used the bedding. This observation explains the
sequence seen in samples SS-6 and SS-5 of laminated
nonburnt fibrous organic material grading into laminated
burnt fibrous organic material with phytoliths (microfacies laminated type 2B); the sequence is finally capped
by a layer of laminated phytoliths.
It seems that the fire temperatures were high enough to
ash the uppermost portion of the bedding. Below the
surface, however, temperatures were lower, resulting in
only charring of the organic material. The lowermost
sections of these layers appear to not have been significantly influenced by the overlying burning event (cf.
Sievers and Wadley 2008). Together, this evidence shows
that not only were the occupants of Sibudu bringing grass
or reeds into the cave—likely for the construction of
bedding—but they were periodically burning them, possibly as a means to remove pests or insects that had colonized
the beds. (Smoldering goat dung and organic matter can be
observed in many parts of the Middle East, including
Hayonim, where tick removal is one of the important
objectives; P. Goldberg 1992, personal observation.) The
micromorphological evidence supports ideas put forth by
Sievers and Wadley (2008) and Sievers (2006) who believe
that a high percentage of charred sedge seeds found in the
Sibudu sediments provides indirect evidence for the
presence of sedge bedding.
Subtype microfacies type 4A consists almost exclusively
of phytoliths (Fig. 5g), although they are not laminated.
This microfacies can contain inclusions of éboulis and
debitage, charcoal, burnt aggregates of river valley clays,
and crushed bone. It is reasonable to assume that this
phytolith-rich microfacies was produced in the same
manner as microfacies type 4; however, the nonlaminated
organization and the inclusion of larger-sized components,
suggests that this layer represents reworking of microfacies
type 4—possibly the result of sweeping or trampling of
previously burnt bedding.
Microfacies type 3 (massive charcoal) provides a
different type of evidence for combustion-related activities
at Sibudu (Fig. 5e). This facies consists of layers of massive
woody charcoal, some of which appear to be dicotyledonous (K. Deckers 2008, personal communication), with
some finely comminuted fibrous charcoal. This material,
like that from microfacies type 2, corresponds to the

112

herbaceous and woody fusinite identified through organic
petrographic analysis. Some of the more amorphous blackcolored material visible in this microfacies can also be
identified as secretinite, burnt seeds or resin/plant gum, and
fat-derived char. The internal organization of these components is chaotic, standing in stark contrast to the finely
laminated organization of material found in microfacies
type 2. Typically, this microfacies is found in association
with an underlying rubefied substrate (see, for instance,
samples SS-6B and SS-5A). Where the surface of this
microfacies unit has been preserved and not removed by
erosion (as is the case in sample SS-4), calcareous ashes
can be found: they are partially dissolving but still exhibit
the classic rhomb form (e.g., sample SS-5A). An example
of microfacies type 3 in sample SS-6B does not exhibit any
calcareous ashes, but directly over the massive charcoal is a
fine layer of phosphatic material, which hints at the former
presence of ashes that have since been diagenetically
altered. The overall structure of microfacies type 3 and the
associated rubefication and overlying ashes show that these
features represent intact combustion features more in line
with classic hearths.
Microfacies type 5, homogeneous anthropogenic components, in contrast to the previously discussed microfacies, is
homogeneous and not structured (Fig. 5h). It is composed
of phosphate, bone, and charcoal, with inclusions of sandand silt-sized grains of quartz. All of the components are
completely mixed, and no obvious bedding or concentration of components is evident. Phytoliths are an important
although not a dominant component of the microfacies.
Microfacies type 5B is identical to microfacies type 5,
except that type 5B lacks phytoliths. The phosphatic nature
of microfacies types 5 and 5B suggests that they represent
diagenetically altered plant ash. This is supported by the
presence of phytoliths in microfacies type 5: the absence of
phytoliths in microfacies type 5B may indicate that a
different fuel was used to produce the ash. The massive
structuring of this microfacies and the chaotic organization
of the larger components within the finer phosphatic matrix
show that, although this microfacies is associated with
combustion-related activities, it is not in its primary
location. Rather, it most likely represents redeposited ash,
either as the result of sweeping or possibly dumping.
Microfacies type 6, phosphatic and calcareous ash, is
similar to microfacies type 5 in that it consists of mostly
phosphatized material. Unlike microfacies type 5, it does
not contain the same type of inclusions but rather contains
calcareous ash, which is actively being dissolved (Fig. 5i).
Gypsum crystal formation is also present. Brown-colored
phosphatized plant matter, often in the form of phosphate
pseudomorphs of ashed plants, is found. Phytoliths are also
present. Microfacies type 6A is similar to microfacies type
6, but it appears more diagenetically altered, with the ash

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

being completely phosphatized (Fig. 5j). For both microfacies, phosphatic crusts may be present (see, for instance,
sample SS-5C), indicating a period of surface exposure.
Because of the extensive diagenesis and gypsum formation,
it is difficult to determine the origin of this ash, although in
some instances it appears at least partially reworked, either
through sweeping or raking out of combustion features.
Microfacies type 7, massive sand, contains the highest
proportion of mineral components (quartz sand) of all the
identified microfacies (Fig. 5k). It also contains a significant proportion of anthropogenically derived components,
including sand-sized angular fragments of burnt bone and
charcoal. The organization of the components in this
microfacies is granular and open, suggesting redeposition,
through raking out, sweeping, or possibly trampling.
Microfacies type 8, massive, compact, very little void
space, is a massive homogenous mixture of most components identified at Sibudu and is the dominant microfacies
of samples collected from the lowermost homogeneous
Howiesons Poort and pre-Howiesons Poort layers (Fig. 5l).
The fine matrix is mostly phosphatic, probably representing
phosphatized ash. Angular bone fragments are common, as
are pieces of charcoal, both fibrous and woody. Large
aggregates of clay derived from the Tongati River are also
present (some of which are burned). The structure of this
microfacies is very compact, with very little void space.
This structure rules out the possibility that the homogeneous nature of this microfacies is a result of bioturbation:
the total lack of biogalleries and voids, the ubiquity of
anthropogenically derived material forming the vast majority of the components of this microfacies, and the
compactness of the microfacies all suggest that this layer
was formed by human trampling. This trampling reworked
any combustion-related features, redistributing the components, and formed a compact homogeneous unit of mostly
burnt material (ash, charcoal, burnt bone, etc.).
Activity-based interpretation of a selected sample
As a means to summarize visually some of the above
discussion, we present here some illustrations that characterize an activity-based interpretation of microfacies
sequences from this study. In this section, we discuss in
greater detail a selected sample, representing the most
typical and important microfacies sequences at Sibudu.
Limitations of space preclude a complete discussion of all
the sampled deposits at Sibudu but are carefully summarized in the included figures (Figs. 6, 7, 8, and 9)
Sample SS-6 (A and B) collected from the B4/B5 line
(east face of B5) contains layers Ma/BO, BM and Pox
(Table 2). The lowermost section of sample 6B is a massive
fluffy layer of phosphatic material (MF type 1) that contains
authigenic gypsum, mostly located near the top of this layer

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 6 a Sample SS-6A-B. (1) Massive fluffy phosphate (MF type
phosphatic type 1), with localized splotches of authigenic gypsum
formation, particularly at the top of the layer. This layer may represent
phosphatized ash; however, the structure and homogenous nature of
the phosphate suggest that this may be guano from birds or bats. (2)
Laminated fibrous organic material (MF type 2). This probably
represents trampled bedding. (3) Massive charcoal, with chaotic
structuring (MF type 3). A yellowish layer above this massive
charcoal probably is phosphatized ash. This, with the presence of a
rubefied zone below the massive charcoal layer, supports the
interpretation that this is an in situ hearth. (4) Laminated fibrous
organic material, similar to (2) but containing large pieces of charcoal
(MF type 2A). Large pieces of burnt bone are present and crushed in

113

situ, forming stringers. This, plus the laminated fibrous material,
suggests that this layer represents bedding or a series of beds. This
layer grades into (5), which is a layer of laminated phytoliths (MF
type 4). This suggests that the bedding was burned in situ. The
phytolith layer is eroded at its surface. (6) overlies the erosional
surface on (5) and consists of a massive mixture of phosphate, angular
burnt bone sand, and quartz grains (MF type 5). This layer is probably
a mixture of phosphatized ash with other components, the organization of which suggests reworking, probably by sweeping or raking out
of an adjacent hearth or combustion feature. b Legend indicated the
symbols used for the anthropogenic and geogenic interpretation of
formation processes

114

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 7 Sample SS-5A-D. (1) Extensive authigenic gypsum formation
that breaks through the overlying laminated phytolith layer (MF type
4). This sequence probably represents in situ burning of trampled
bedding. (2) Homogenous phosphatic material (MF type 5) containing
burnt bone, fire-altered river valley sediment, and phytoliths. The
phosphatic material is probably phosphatized ash. The chaotic and
open structure of the components suggests that this material was
reworked or redeposited (sweeping/raking out or dumping). (3)
Massive chaotically structured charcoal (MF type 3). The components
and structure of this layer suggest an in situ hearth. However, portions
have been reworked, possibly by trampling. (4) Consists of two layers,
one of which pinches out. Based on the components and structure of
these layers, they most likely represent sweep or rake out of ash from
adjacent hearths. The lowermost layer that pinches out is extensively
phosphatized (MF type 5), whereas the uppermost layer contains
evidence of its original calcareous nature, with calcitic ash rhombs still
present (MF type 6). (5) Fibrous material, some of which is partially
burned (MF type 2B), grading into an overlying layer of laminated
phytoliths (MF type 4). This sequence probably represents trampled
bedding, which was ultimately burned. (6) Laminated fibrous organic

material and containing larger pieces of charcoal and bone (MF type
2A). (7) Laminated phytoliths (MF type 4): this sequence again
represents trampled bedding that was burned in situ. (8) Nonlaminated
phytoliths mixed with phosphatic material (MF type 4a). This is
probably reworked ashy material, possibly representing sweep out or
rake out of an adjacent combustion feature. The high number of
phytoliths may suggest that this is reworked material from a grass
bedding. (9) Laminated fibrous organic layer (MF type 2A) and is
marked on its surface by a possible erosional event. Probably
represents bedding. (10) Nonlaminated phytoliths (MF type 4a),
representing sweep out or rake out of an adjacent combustion feature,
possibly a burnt bedding. (11) The rest of the sequence is heavily
modified by bioturbation; however, the remnants of a massive
charcoal layer (MF type 3), with a rubefied base and overlying ash,
can be identified in sample 5A as an in situ hearth. (12) On top of the
ash are the remnants of laminated organic material (MF type 2A),
representing a trampled grass bedding. Throughout the sequence,
phosphatization has strongly effected the preservation of calcitic
material, most notably ash. There are only a few zones where ash has
not been completely altered

(Fig. 6). The upper contact of this phosphatic unit is marked
by the formation of a phosphatic crust. Although this layer
possibly consists of phosphatized ash, the fluffy structure of
the phosphate is more reminiscent of guano (Karkanas and
Goldberg 2009). The presence of authigenic gypsum within
phosphate-rich guano suggests that the presence of gypsum

is at least partially a result of the diagenetic alteration of
guano (Shahack-Gross et al. 2004). The presence of a
diagenetically produced phosphatic crust is the result of this
layer being exposed to the surface for a period of time.
Directly above the phosphatic crust is a layer of finely
laminated fibrous organic matter that does not contain large

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

115

Fig. 8 Sample 04-04A-C. (1) Laminated organic material with some
pieces of charcoal (MF type 2A). The laminated fibrous material is
partially charred. This probably represents trampled bedding. It could
have been burned in situ, although this layer lacks the accompanying
overlying phytolith layer found in other samples (see samples 4, 5,
and 6). (2) Massive layer of phosphatized material (probably ash)
which contains phytoliths, calcined bones, and fire-altered clasts of
river valley sediment (MF type 6A). The reddened river valley
sediment gives the light-colored phosphatized ash its pinkish hue. This
material was probably redeposited from an adjacent combustion
feature, possibly through sweeping, trampling, or a combination of
both. (3) Caps the phosphatic ash and consists of 1.5-mm-sized fecal
pellets, mixed with angular bone sand. This layer probably represents
a period of abandonment, when rodents or small animal inhabited the
cave, and anthropogenic input was relatively low. (4) Angular crushed
bone, within a matrix of phosphatized material (MF type 5A).
Phytoliths are rare or absent. This layer probably represents
phosphatized ash that was reworked by sweeping or rake out from
an adjacent combustion feature. It was most likely trampled, based on
the presence of crushed bone fragments. (5) Massive charcoal and

some fibrous organic material that is burnt (MF type 3). It probably
represents an in situ hearth that was trampled, based on the presence
of a large (centimeter size) bone that is snapped in situ. (6) Above (5),
but the transition from (5) to (6) is not visible due to the subsampling
of the blocks for thin sectioning. This layer consists of laminated
organic material (MF type 2A). (7) Rich in phosphatized material
(ashes) and contains some phytoliths (MF type 6A). The top of this
layer is marked by a phosphatic crust, which appears broken and
affected by bioturbation. This probably indicated a period of little
anthropogenic input. (8) Loose, chaotically structured, and charcoal
and charred fibrous organic material (MF type 3). The upper portion
of this layer is affected by extensive authigenic gypsum formation.
However, the presence of a phosphatic zone at the top of the layer,
most likely representing phosphatized ash, supports the interpretation
of this layer as an in situ hearth. (9) Generally, homogenous mixture
of phosphatized material, with angular burnt bone sand, quartz grains,
and fibrous organic material. This layer appears to have been
reworked, possibly by sweeping or raking out of a combustion
feature. Bioturbation and gypsum formation make it difficult to
determine the structure of this layer

inclusions (MF type 2). The fibrous material does not
appear burned but at least partially humified.
Directly over the laminated material is a thin layer of
massive woody and herbaceous charcoal (MF type 3). A
rubefied zone, extending less than a centimeter deep, is
located directly below the massive charcoal layer. A thin
layer of yellowish phosphate is located on top of the
charcoal and probably is phosphatized ash. This layer is not
laterally extensive within the slide and interfingers with

laminated fibrous matter. The material directly above the
massive charcoal and phosphatized ash is laminated fibrous
material, containing inclusions of éboulis, burnt bone,
charcoal, and lithic fragments. This layer grades up into a
layer of laminated phytoliths (MF type 4), which is in some
places 2 to 3 cm thick. Its upper surface is marked by an
erosional contact and is directly overlain by a massive layer
of homogeneously mixed phosphate, bone, charcoal, and
quartz sand.

116

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 9 a Sample 04-05 A-B. (1) Large amount of microcharcoal
crushed burnt bone and is chaotically structured (MF type 3). The
extensive amount of authigenic gypsum formation in this sample
makes interpretation and determination of the structure difficult, but
this layer may represent an in situ hearth. (2) Extensively phosphatized, more than most other layers in this sample. The few areas that
are not displaced by blotchy authigenic gypsum consist of phosphate,
suggesting that this layer consisted of phosphatized ash before the
formation of gypsum. This ash may belong to the underlying charcoal
layer as part of an in situ hearth; however, extensive diagenesis makes
this difficult to determine. (3) Massive charcoal and phosphatic zones
(MF type 3 and MF type 5). Extensive formation of gypsum,
displacing most of the components and disrupting the structure,
making interpretation difficult; however, this may represent a mixture
of charcoal and ash, reworked from a hearth or combustion feature. (4)
Mixture of charcoal and phosphate, possibly representing phosphatized ash (MF type 5). This layer may correspond with the underlying
layer (4). Extensive gypsum formation disrupts the structure of this
layer. (5) Laminated fibrous organic material (MF type 2), containing
stringers of in situ, crushed burnt bone, suggesting trampling.

Although authigenic gypsum formation is present, it does not
significantly disrupt the laminated nature of this layer. The trampled
bone and laminated fibrous material suggest possible bedding. This
bedding may have been burned in situ. (6) Laminated fibrous organic
material, containing a larger portion of pieces of charcoal (MF type
2A). Localized large blotches of authigenic gypsum have displaced
significant portion of this layer, disrupting the structural organization
of the components. It is possible that this layer, like the underlying
layer (5) represents trampled bedding. Some fibrous material appears
charred, possibly suggesting in situ burning of this layer. b Sample
SS-4. (1) Homogenous mixture of phosphate, bone, phytoliths, etc.
(MF type 5). This probably represents swept or raked out components
from a nearby combustion feature. (2) Massive layer of chaotically
structured charcoal, resembling an in situ hearth. The top of the hearth
and a portion of the underlying layer have been eroded. (3) Massive
sandy layer, with angular bone fragments and charcoal (MF type 7).
The structure is granular and open, suggesting redeposition, possibly
by sweeping, rake out, or possibly trampling. This layer has a greater
proportion of mineral and geogenic components

Piecing all of these layers together and using the
anthropogenic inferences of the formation of these microfacies, we are able to attempt the reconstruction of a series
of activities that took place during a part of Sibudu’s
history. The phosphatic surface crust at the top of layer

POX (illustrated at the base of sample SS-6B) suggests, at
least locally, a period of no anthropogenic input. It is
difficult to say exactly how long this would have lasted, but
such crusts can form quickly, on the order of decades
(Shahack-Gross et al. 2004). This rapidity seems likely in

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

this case because the entire sequence YA2 to BSp was
formed within a relatively short period of about 1,000 years
at about 60 ka (Jacobs et al. 2008). The laminated fibrous
organic material directly above the crust is possibly sedge
and/or grass that was transported to the cave by humans to
use as some type of bedding and was extensively trampled.
The massive charcoal layer above this bedding, with a
rubefied base and overlying phosphatic ash, most likely
represents an intact combustion feature (e.g., Goldberg et
al. 2007; Meignen et al. 2007). The laminated fibrous
material continues over the hearth feature, although, in
contrast to the lowermost layer of laminated material, this
one contains large centimeter-sized inclusions. Many of
these inclusions, particularly charcoal and burnt bone,
appear snapped or crushed in place. Such features have
been taken to indicate the effects of trampling [e.g., at Pech
de l'Azé IV (Dibble et al. 2009, submitted); and at Castanet
(Goldberg 2007) both in the Dordogne, France]; trampling
experiments have also produced crushed bone resembling
that found at Sibudu (Miller et al. 2009). Often, the crushed
bone and charcoal are spread out forming stringers that
define a surface. Clasts of éboulis and lithic fragments from
stone tool production are also oriented horizontally to
subhorizontally, following the bedding plane defined by the
microlaminations of the fibrous material.
Interesting to note is that the crushed bone stringers and
other inclusions are not simply limited to a single bed or
layer but are found throughout the layer of laminated
fibrous material. This arrangement would suggest that there
are numerous surfaces represented here that were subjected
to trampling. One interpretation of these objects is that the
fibrous material represents bedding, which was repeatedly
built up and managed and that the oriented stringers and
inclusions represent different surfaces. If this is the case,
then it seems that bringing fibrous plant material (possibly
sedges) into the cave did not occur as a single event but was
repeated numerous times during the occupation as part of
managing a surface or area.
Further evidence for management of the bedding is found
in the charred and ashed upper portion of microfacies type 2
(found at the bottom section of sample SS-6A, Fig. 6). Here,
the laminated fibrous material grades into and is capped by a
layer of laminated phytoliths. It seems likely that this
phytolith layer was produced by burning and ashing of the
upper most portion of a grass or sedge “bed.” Any ash
present in this uppermost portion was subsequently phosphatized (as evidenced by the presence of phosphate
“pockets” remaining within the phytolith layer). As the
nonsiliceous remains were diagenetically altered, it seems
that they were also removed from the phytolith layer.
The association of authigenic gypsum below the phytolith layer may be a result of the vertical translocation of
carbonate and sulfate ions produced by the ashing process

117

(Schiegl and Conard 2006). The surface of the phytolith
layer is marked by erosion. It is not unreasonable to
imagine that an unconsolidated layer of phytoliths would
easily be subjected to some type of erosion, be it natural
(winnowing from wind) or anthropogenic (sweeping). The
presence of a massive reworked layer of phosphatized ash,
phytoliths, charcoal, burnt bone, and charcoal directly
above the erosional surface would suggest that the erosion
of the phytolith layer was probably produced by sweeping
or some similar human activity.
Although the interpretation of sample SS-6 portrays a
succession of events as represented by the sequence of
microfacies, the situation is more complex than depicted
here. The concept of microfacies, particularly as developed
by Courty (2001), does not just simply entail vertical
variation in microfacies type but also horizontal ones,
which represent different spatially restricted activities or
environments that may have occurred contemporaneously.
This is certainly the case at Sibudu, where lateral variation
is great and many discrete features are only traceable for
tens of centimeters. Although a sequence of events is
described as observed in the thin section, it should not be
conceptualized that these activities occurred in isolation.
All of the activities identified through interpretation of the
microfacies, as presented above, probably occurred repeatedly during an individual occupation and in the immediately following one, which might have been a few
decimeters away. Viewed as a whole, the combined
activities as evidenced through the different microfacies
consisted of the penecontemporaneous transport of plant
material (sedges, reeds, grass, or possibly a combination of
all three) for bedding and the construction of hearths.
During an occupation, surfaces were managed through the
adding of more plant material, the sweeping or raking out
of extinguished hearths, and the burning of bedding. An
example of the contemporaneity of different microfacies
and lateral differences in specific activities can be found in
sample SS-6B, where a rubefied base charcoal sequence of
an intact hearth interfingers with a layer of laminated
organic fibers (Fig. 6). As multiple, yet similar, occupations
occurred in the rock shelter over time, these different
activities and their corresponding microfacies were superposed over one another, forming the varied interbedded
sequences seen in the thin sections and in the field.
Consequences of this micromorphological study
The degree of detail that we have been able to document
above has significant ramifications for the study of other
data sets at Sibudu and for archaeological sites in general.
Specifically for Sibudu, the basis of the archaeometric
study (Herries 2006) inferring past climates is not consistent with the micromorphological observations. We see

118

little if any evidence for “... the input of derived soils by
aeolian activity” (P. 131) nor for the input of background
fire burning for this part of Africa. Furthermore, in light of
the virtually complete anthropogenic character of the
Sibudu sediments it is interesting to note:
Well defined hearths that are easily recognised can
and must be avoided in sampling. Notwithstanding
such precautions, background anthropogenic indicators may still occur in the MS [magnetic susceptibility] signal and this will complicate the results (Herries
2006: 145).
In this regard, it would seem that a full understanding of
site formation processes needs to be gathered before
interpretations can be made on the potential of a site to
record climatic signals. Although the MS measurements
taken at Sibudu certainly provide data, an incomplete
understanding of the nature of deposition at the site and a
lack of understanding of the basic components of the
sediment being measured can lead one down the wrong
interpretive path. For example, it may be that the MS
results measured—at least in part—the ubiquitous burnt
river valley clay aggregates. Although these aggregates
could be considered as “derived soil,” the micromorphological analysis shows that these components were brought
to the cave by humans and not by processes directly
associated with climatic conditions (Fig. 10).
The presence of “ochre” at Stone Age sites is a contentious issue, relating to the broader discussion of behavioral modernity (see, for instance, Henshilwood and Marean
2003). Although the topic of ochre at South African sites is
too large to discuss in full here, it should be noted that very
few discussions of ochre actually define what it is, other
than a red substance used either for pigment or as a hafting
material (Lombard 2006). In light of the presence of
ubiquitous microscopic granules of red material identified
as aggregates of river valley sediment transported by
humans, almost certainly accidentally, to Sibudu, it seems
necessary to reevaluate at least a part of what has been
interpreted as “ochre” at South African sites. Red ochre
(hematite—Fe2O3) thought to have been mixed with plant
gum to create adhesive often occurs on stone tools in
fairly large deposits that are even visible to the naked eye.
Ground striated hematite nodules are fairly common in
Sibudu and other Stone Age sites in southern Africa. The
iron content of some of the archaeologically recovered
Sibudu “ochres” was measured by S. Schiegl using
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. A yellow piece
of ochre from Gray under YA2 was identified as goethite
(FeOOH) and a red piece of ochre from the layer Gray
Rocky was identified as hematite (Fe2O3). However,
incidental or scattered “ochre grains” that are not thought
to be use-related sometimes occur on stone tools. Thus,

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

when Lombard (2006) stated that “microscopic ochre
granules are very small in comparison with the residues
found on the tools, and are usually isolated single grains,”
it seems likely that at least a portion of these granules
could be the burnt river valley clay aggregates that appear
red in color (Fig. 11). Similar geological material may
lead to the inflation of the occurrence of ochre as
identified at other MSA sites. Based on our results, not
all material that looks like ochre is ochre.
Finally, this microstratigraphic study has broader implications for specialist studies and how archaeology is
practiced in general. In the field, one can perceive that the
deposits are made up of not just combustion features but
also some more diffuse combusted products. What becomes
evident to a much greater extent in thin section, however,
are the subtle differences among “burnt layers” as exemplified by sample SS-5 (Fig. 6) from layer OMOD,
interpreted as a hearth complex (Wadley 2006). Here, we
are able to monitor, for example, a complex succession of
layers of phytoliths, phosphatic ashes, massive charcoal
layers, phosphatic and calcareous ashes, laminated organic matter, all expressed at the centimeter scale. Most of
these centimetric layers represent an individual occupation event or activity (e.g., burning) or perhaps associated
events (e.g., sweeping, trampling). Whereas such lithosedimentary differences are worthily tracked in the field,
it is not possible to individualize them as can be done in
thin section.
The point here is not to criticize the meticulous research of
our colleagues at the site but to underscore that, if
archaeology wishes to advance beyond the synoptic view
of reporting or examining major environmental shifts, we
must look at the data in its proper anthropological context—
the context at which individual activities occur and are
recorded—namely, the microlayer. By collapsing and combining individual and discrete contexts into broader analytical units, we only blur the anthropological contexts of the
artifacts. This is particularly true for a site like Sibudu, where
excellent preservation and careful excavation of individual
contexts provide an ideal situation for evaluating discrete
human activities.

Concluding comments
Most of the deposits in the rock shelter, Sibudu, are
anthropogenic in character, with relatively lower amounts
of geogenic ones such as inclusions of éboulis derived from
rock fall. Even finer-grained materials, such as clay, were
brought into the cave from the river valley by its former
inhabitants. Micromorphological analysis of several of the
Sibudu Cave deposits revealed that on a centimeter scale
the remains of numerous anthropogenic events and activ-

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

119

Fig. 10 a A view of the Tongati River near Sibudu Cave. b Another
view of the Tongati River, with the bedded sandstones that form the
rock shelter visible. Note the presence of running water, the reddish

color of the sediment, and the presence of grasses and sedges.
Vegetation and sediment removed from the river can be identified in
thin section

ities are recorded. In fact, in the field, the large difference in
sediments at roughly layer YA2 can be attributed to
extensive trampling of the deposits below YA2 and not to
natural diagenetic processes. The visible differences in the
deposits above and below this layer, which is the base of
the ∼60 ka post-Howiesons Poort occupation, suggest that
there was a major change in the type of occupation at
Sibudu after the Howiesons Poort occupations after 60 ka
(Wadley and Jacobs 2006) as these lower deposits are
composed essentially of compacted combustion products,
but most of these are no longer in place.

Several hypotheses can be put forth to address these
differences. The basic puzzle of this dichotomy is that both
the laminated and massive units show evidence of
trampling; however, the same anthropogenic process has
produced different results. In the more massive units of the
Howiesons Poort and earlier deposits, trampling has had the
effect of homogenizing the units, whereas in the laminated
post-Howiesons Poort and later deposits, trampling has
compacted the original combustion deposits but did not
transport them. Although the upper bedded layers show
signs of bone crushing related to trampling, it is possible

120

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

Fig. 11 a A group of fire-reddened clay and quartz silt aggregates
derived from the local river valley. Here, they are found within MF
type 3, suggesting either that they were either incorporated into a
hearth attached to vegetation used for fuel or were accidentally tracked
in to the cave by the inhabitants. From sample SS-5B. b A single
aggregate from sample 04-4B. The size and reddish color of these

components may resemble what has been identified as “ochre.” These
components were brought to the cave by humans but most likely as
sediment attached to sedges and/or grasses from the river valley. It
seems unlikely that this material represents use of ochre, either for
symbolic or functional uses

that the more homogeneous units accumulated more slowly,
thus allowing for more trampling, other things being equal.
As a consequence, discrete surfaces in these lower units
would have been exposed for a longer period of time,
allowing for a greater influence of trampling on the deposits,
effectively homogenizing them. Conversely, a higher rate of
deposition in the upper deposits would mean that trampling
would have had a more limited effect, allowing for limited
compaction of material and the crushing of individual
components. Deposits, however, would have been buried
before extensive trampling could have completely reworked
and homogenized individual features. Evidence for lower
sedimentation during the earlier periods at Sibudu is
provided by the increased presence of mineral components
in the homogeneous layers, as seen in thin section.
The scenario presented above has important ramifications. Since the vast majority of sediments at Sibudu result
from anthropogenic deposition, the homogeneous Howiesons Poort and earlier layers, representing lower deposition
rates, would suggest that there was an increase in the
intensity of occupation at Sibudu during the postHowiesons Poort occupation. Another possible, but not
mutually exclusive, hypothesis is that the use of sedge and/
or grass bedding influenced the effects of trampling on the
different types of deposits. Sedge and/or grass bedding and
subsequent management of the bedding would have
stabilized surfaces, absorbing the pressure exerted on a
surface by trampling and reducing the amount of material
reworked by trampling. Evidence for this can be seen in
thin section, where the laminated fibrous layers are
compacted and show evidence of crushed and spread-out
material on surfaces, but they lack the overall reworking of
material seen in the homogeneous units. While it is

impossible to argue from negative evidence, the lower
quantity of phytoliths noted in thin sections from the
homogeneous layers and a decrease in sedge seeds in the
lower sections may provide less direct evidence that sedges
were not brought to the cave for bedding during the
Howiesons Poort and earlier occupations.
The issue of bedding at Sibudu is an important one and
deserves more detailed attention. The use of plant material
for bedding in caves and rock shelters has a long history,
particularly in South Africa. Since the 1950s, excavators at
South African caves have described stratified sites that, in
their opinion, contained evidence for preserved grass
bedding. These sites span the time scale from recent
historic situations (Walton 1951; Stannard 1965) to Iron
Age deposits (Parkington and Poggenpoel 1971; Van
Rijssen and Avery 1992) and Later Stone Age (Binneman
1997, 1998, 1999, 2000; Wadley 1976; Wells 1965).
Although some of these instances are clear, particularly
in later contexts, the presence of bedding in earlier Middle
Stone Age deposits is not conclusively shown in the
reports. Recently, Sievers and Wadley (2008) have suggested that, in Sibudu, the high frequencies of sedge nutlets
(Schoenoplectus cf. brachyceras) in the laminated deposits,
particularly the ∼50-ka layers OMOD and MOD, are the
result of humans bringing in local sedges for bedding or
matting, noting that sedge is commonly used for woven
mats today (Van Wyk and Gericke 2000). The micromorphological evidence, along with preliminary phytolith
identification (Arlene Rosen 2008, personal communication), presented in this study supports the interpretation of
Sievers and Wadley (2008) and provides direct evidence to
show that plant materials, most likely sedges, were brought
to the cave to serve as bedding.

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122

The methodology of micromorphology, coupled with the
excellent preservation at Sibudu, allows for a detailed
analysis of complex activities and behaviors: something not
previously achieved for Pleistocene sites. As such, the level
of detail may make it tempting to see this behavior as
exceptionally complex, particularly when compared to the
coarser, and stratigraphically lower, homogeneous layers.
Before this change is interpreted as an increase in complex
behavior at Sibudu, several caveats must be stated. The
construction and maintenance of bedding, through repeated
construction during a single occupation and also through
occasional burning of the bedding, are behaviors not
previously described for the MSA. Furthermore, the
identification of different and distinct microfacies, representing not only bedding construction and maintenance but
also hearth construction and sweeping and dumping, shows
that numerous activities occurred during single occupations,
and these activities occurred within localized spaces. This is
particularly evident in sample SS-6, where the laminated
plant material shows evidence of repeated construction
during a single occupation.
Organization of living space, and particularly a deliberate use of space, has been suggested by Wadley (2001) and
also Binford (1996) as an important trait of culturally
modern behavior, reflecting a more complex social organization. While the evidence from the laminated units at
Sibudu may reflect such organization, the lack of evidence
for such spatial organization, such as is the case for the
lower homogeneous layers at Sibudu, should not automatically suggest that occupation in these units was any less
complex. Even if the hypothesis that the construction of
bedding in the upper levels is the main reason for the
difference in structure of the homogeneous and laminated
units at Sibudu is correct, we cannot make any conclusive
statements about the complexity of the occupation for the
lower units. In order to test such hypotheses and ideas,
more caves with similar stratigraphy to Sibudu’s should be
the subject of micromorphological analysis. More systematic studies of exposed deposits from Sibudu in the future
should also reveal more clearly spatial and temporal
differences—or similarities—within the site.

Acknowledgements Financial support for this research was provided in part by a Deutsche Forshungsgemeinschaft (DFG) Grant CO226/
31-1 to S. Schiegl and N. Conard; a graduate student grant by the
Deutsche Akademische Austauschdienst (DAAD) to C. Miller; the US
National Science Foundation Grant to P. Goldberg (BCS #0551927);
and the support by a Marie Curie International Fellowship within the
6th European Community Framework Program to F. Berna (# MOIFCT-2006-041053). A. Rosen provided some valuable preliminary
determinations of phytoliths, and K. Deckers helped to identify some
charcoal remains. Johan Binneman courteously provided much
difficult-to-locate information about the use of grass matting from
archaeological contexts in South Africa.

121

References
Berna F, Goldberg P (2007) Assessing Paleolithic pyrotechnology and
associated hominin behavior in Israel. Israel J Earth Sci 56:107–121
Berna F, Behar A, Shahack-Gross R, Berg J, Zorn J, Boaretto E,
Gilboa A, Sharon I, Shalev S, Silshtein S, Weiner S (2007)
Sediments exposed to high temperatures: reconstructing pyrotechnological practices in late Bronze and Iron Age strata at Tel
Dor (Israel). J Archaeol Sci 34:358–373
Binford LR (1996) Hearth and home: the spatial analysis of
ethnographically documented rock shelter occupations as a
template for distinguishing between human and hominid use of
sheltered space. In: Conard NJ, Wendorf F (eds) Middle
Paleolithic and Middle Stone Age settlement systems. A.B.A.C.
O. Edizioni, Forli, pp 229–239
Binneman J (1997) Results from a test excavation at the Havens Cave,
Cambria Valley, South-eastern Cape. South Afr Field Archaeol
6:93–105
Binneman J (1998) Results from a test excavation at Kleinpoort
Shelter in the Bavianskloof, Eastern Cape Province. South Afr
Field Archaeol 7:90–97
Binneman J (1999) Results from a test excavation at Groot
Kommandokloof Shelter in the Baviaanskloof/Kouga Region,
Eastern Cape Province. South Afr Field Archaeol 8:100–107
Binneman J (2000) Results from two test excavations in the
Baviaanskloof Mountains, Eastern Cape Province. South Afr
Field Archaeol 9:83–96
Brochier JE, Thinon M (2003) Calcite crystals, starch grains
aggregates or... POCC? Comment on ‘calcite crystals inside
archaeological plant tissues’. J Archaeol Sci 30:1211–1214
Cain CR (2005) Using burned bone to look at Middle Stone Age
occupation and behavior. J Archaeol Sci 32:873–884
Canti MG (2003) Aspects of the chemical and microscopic characteristics of plant ashes found in archaeological soils. Catena
54:339–361
Courty M-A (2001) Microfacies analysis assisting archaeological
stratigraphy. In: Goldberg P, Holliday VT, Ferring CR (eds) Earth
sciences and archaeology. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York,
pp 205–239
Courty M-A, Goldberg P, Macphail RI (1989) Soils and micromorphology in archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Flügel E (2004) Microfacies of carbonate rocks: analysis, interpretation and application. Springer, Berlin
Goldberg P (2007) Micromorphologie. In: White R (ed) Abris
Castanet, secteurs sud et nord (Commune de Sergeac, Dordogne)
Rapport de fouille programmée Année 2007, pp 16–18
Goldberg P, Macphail R (2003) Strategies and techniques in collecting
micromorphology samples. Geoarchaeology 18(5):571–578
Goldberg P, Macphail RI (2006) Practical and theoretical geoarchaeology. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
Goldberg P, Laville H, Meignen L (2007) Stratigraphy and geoarchaeological history of Kebara Cave, Mount Carmel. In: BarYosef O, Meignen L (eds) Kebara Cave, vol 2. Peabody
Museum, Cambridge
Henshilwood CS, Marean CW (2003) The origin of modern human
behavior: a review and critique of models and test implications.
Curr Anthropol 44(5):627–651
Herries AIR (2006) Archaeomagnetic evidence for climate change at
Sibudu Cave. South Afr Humanities 18(1):131–147
International Committee for Coal and Organic Petrology (ICCP)
(2001) The new inertinite classification (ICCP System 1994).
Fuel 80(4):459–471
Jacobs Z, Wintle AG, Duller GAT, Roberts RG, Wadley L (2008) New
ages for the post-Howiesons Poort, late and final Middle Stone
Age at Sibudu, South Africa. J Archaeol Sci 35:1790–1807

122
Karkanas P, Goldberg P (2009) Site formation processes in Site PP13B
(Pinnacle Point, South Africa): resolving stratigraphic and depositional complexities with micromorphology. J Hum Evol (in press)
Ligouis B (2006) Jais, lignite, charbon et autres matières organiques
fossiles: application de la pétrologie organique à l´étude des
éléments de parure et des fragments bruts. In Bullinger J, Leesch
D, Plumettaz N (eds) Le site magdalénien de Monruz, 1.
Premiers éléments pour l´analyse d´un habitat de plein air.
Neuchâtel, Service et Musée cantonal d´archéologie, Archéologie
neuchâteloise, vol. 33, pp 197–216
Lombard M (2006) First impressions of the functions and hafting
technology of Still Bay pointed artefacts from Sibudu Cave.
South Afr Humanit 81(1):27–41
Macphail RI, Courty MA, Hather J, Wattez J (1997) The soil
micromorphological evidence of domestic occupation and stabling activities. In: Maggi R (ed) Arene Candide: a functional
and environmental assessment of the Holocene sequence (Excavations Bernabò Brea-Cardini 1940–50). Memorie dell'Istituto
Italiano di Paleontologia Umana, Roma, pp 53–88
Meignen L, Goldberg P, Bar-Yosef O (2007) The hearths at Kebara
Cave and their role in site formation processes. In: Bar-Yosef O,
Meignen L (eds) The Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeology
of the Kebara Cave, Mt Carmel, Israel. Peabody Museum,
Harvard University, Cambridge, pp 91–122
Miller CE, Conard NJ, Goldberg P, Berna F (2009) Dumping,
sweeping and trampling: experimental micromorphological analysis of anthropogenically modified combustion features. Paléthologie (in press)
Nadel D, Weiss E, Simchoni O, Tsatskin A, Danin A, Kislev M (2004)
Stone Age hut in Israel yields world's oldest evidence of bedding.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 101(17):6821–6826
Parkington J, Poggenpoel C (1971) Excavations at De Hangen, 1968.
South Afr Archaeol Bull 26(101/102):3–36
Pickering R (2006) Regional geology, setting and sedimentology of
Sibudu Cave. South Afr Humanit 18(1):123–129
Schiegl S, Conard NJ (2006) The Middle Stone Age sediments at
Sibudu: results from FTIR spectroscopy and microscopic
analyses. South Afr Humanit 18(1):149–172
Schiegl S, Goldberg P, Bar-Yosef O, Weiner S (1996) Ash deposits in
Hayonim and Kebara caves, Israel: macroscopic, microscopic,
and mineralogical observations and their archaeological implications. J Archaeol Sci 23:763–781

Archaeol Anthropol Sci (2009) 1:95–122
Schiegl S, Ligouis B, Conard NJ, Goldberg P (2004) Mineralogy,
micromorphology, phytolith analysis and organic petrology of
Middle Palaeolithic and MSA Cave Sites: comparison between
Sibudu (South Africa) and the Levant. In Geoarchaeology of the
Eastern Mediterranean. University of Tübingen, July, 2004
Shahack-Gross R, Berna F, Karkanas P, Weiner S (2004) Bat guano
and preservation of archaeological remains in cave sites. J
Archaeol Sci 31(9):1259–1272
Sievers C (2006) Seeds from the Middle Stone Age layers at Sibudu
Cave. South Afr Humanities 18(1):203–222
Sievers C, Wadley L (2008) Going underground: experimental
carbonization of fruiting structures under hearths. J Archaeol
Sci 35(11):2909–2917
Stannard C (1965) A report on preliminary excavations in Tarzan’s
Cave, Simonstown. S Afr Archaeol Bull 20(78):91–93
Stoops G (2003) Guidelines for analysis and description of soil and
regolith thin sections. Soil Science Society of America, Madison
Taylor GH, Teichmüller M, Davis A, Diessel CFK, Littke R, Robert P
(1998) Organic Petrology. Gebrüder Bornträger, Berlin
van Rijssen WJ, Avery G (1992) The late Holocene deposits at Klein
Kliphuis Shelter, Cedarberg, Western Cape Province. S Afr
Archaeol Bull 47(155):34–43
van Wyk BE, Gericke N (2000) People's plants: a guide to useful
plants of southern Africa. Briza, Pretoria
Wadley L (1976) Radiocarbon dates from big elephant shelter, Erongo
Mountains, South West Africa. S Afr Archaeol Bull 31(123/
124):146
Wadley L (2001) What is cultural modernity? a general view and a
South African perspective from Rose Cottage Cave. Camb
Archaeol J 11(2):201–221
Wadley L (2006) Partners in grime. South Afr Humanities 18(1):315–
341
Wadley L, Jacobs Z (2004) Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal: background
to the excavations of Middle Stone Age and Iron Age
occupations. South Afr J Sci 100:145–151
Wadley L, Jacobs Z (2006) Sibudu Cave: background to the
excavations, stratigraphy and dating. South Afr Humanities 18
(1):1–26
Walton J (1951) Occupied rock shelters in Basutoland. S Afr Archaeol
Bull 6(21):9–13
Wells MJ (1965) An analysis of plant remains from Scott’s Cave in the
Gamtoos Valley. S Afr Archaeol Bull 20(78):79–84

