RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES AMONG HUNTER-GATHERERS IN NORTH AMERICA
Kent G. Lightfoot, Rob Q. Cuthrell, Chuck J. Striplen, and Mark G. Hylkema

There has been little movement to systematically incorporate the study of indigenous landscape management practices into
the method and theory of hunter-gatherer research in North American archaeology, despite a growing interest in this topic.
The purposes of this article are twofold. One is to address why, until quite recently, archaeologists have been reluctant to
engage in the current debate about the scale and ecological impact of these practices, particularly anthropogenic burning.
We argue that this stems from a long tradition of viewing hunter-gatherers as passive, immediate-return foragers, as well
as from the daunting methodological challenges of identify ing landscape management activities using archaeological data.
Our second purpose is to explore how archaeologists can make significant contributions to our understanding ofpast resource
management practices through the creation of new kinds of collaborative, interdisciplinary eco-archaeological programs.
Based on the current work of scholars in archaeological and environmental disciplines, as well as on our own implementation of such an approach in central California, we discuss the importance of maintaining mutual relationships with local
tribes, the challenges of coordinating multiple data sets, and the process of rethinking our analytical methods and temporal scales for undertaking hunter-gatherer studies.
Ha habido poco movimiento para incorporar sistemdticamente el estudio de los prdcticos de direcciones recursos indigenas
en el metodo y en la teoria de las investigaciones de los cazador-recolectores en la arqueologia Norte Americana, a pesar del
interes creciendo en este tema. Hay dos propositos de este arti'culo. Uno es abordar porque', hasta recientemente, arqueologos han sido reacios en dedicarse dentro del debate actual del escalo y del impacto ecologico de estos prdcticos, particularmente losfuegos antropologicos. Argumentamos que este viene de una gran tradicion de pensar en los cazador-recolectores
como forrajeros pasivos quienes regresan inmediatamente a sus tierras ya habitadas. Tambien viene de los desafi'os metodologicos tan desalentados en identificando los prdcticos de direcciones recursos usando datos arqueologicos. Nuestro segun
proposito es explorar como arqueologos pueden hacer contribuciones significantes a nuestro entendimiento sobre los prdcticos de direcciones recursos pasados por la creacion de nuevos tipos de programas colaborativos, interdisciplinarios, y ecologicos. Basada en el trabajo actual de los eruditos en disciplinarios arqueologicos y ecologicos, ademds de nuestra
implementacion de tal enfoque en California Central, discutimos la importancia en manteniendo relaciones mutuales con tribales locales, los desafi'os en coordinando multiples conjuntos de datos, el proceso de repensar nuestros metodos analiticos y
escalos temporales para emprender los estudios de los cazador-recolectores.

P

erceptions about hunter-gatherers in North

ments. Anthropologists describe diverse activities

America have undergone significant transformations in the anthropological literature in recent years. Once depicted as passive
foragers who simply harvested available foods
and raw materials from relatively pristine ecosystems, they are now recognized as agents who actively modified and constructed local environ-

that hunter-gatherers employ to stimulate the
growth and diversity of floral and faunal resources across the landscape, which include prescribed burning, tillage, pruning, seed broadcasting, transplanting, mulching/fertilizing, weeding,
and irrigation, as well as the tending of clam beds
and fish eggs (Anderson 2005; Blackburn and

Kent G. Lightfoot • Department of Anthropology, Archaeological Research Facility, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720-3710 (klightfoot@berkeley.edu)
Rob Q. Cuthrell • Department of Anthropology, Archaeological Research Facility, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-3710
Chuck J. Striplen • Amah Mutsun Tribal Band, San Francisco Estuary Institute, Department of Environmental Science,
Policy, and Management, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3114
Mark G. Hylkema • California Department of Parks and Recreation, Santa Cruz District, Felton, CA 95018-9660
American Antiquity 78(2), 2013, pp. 285-301
Copyright © 2013 by the Society for American Archaeology
285

286

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

Anderson 1993; Deur and Turner 2005; Fowler
and Lepofsky 2011; Peacock and Turner 2000;
Turner and Peacock 2005). In particular, the
strategic use of fire is argued to be an important
management tool once used to construct productive anthropogenic landscapes in many regions of
North America (e.g., Boyd 1999; Hammett 1991,
1992; Lewis 1993; Patterson and Sassaman 1988;
Stewart 2002). Fowler and Lepofsky refer collectively to the various activities and knowledge
employed to enhance the abundance, diversity,
and/or availability of local resources as "traditional resource and environmental management"
(TREM [2011:286]). This article considers management practices, particularly anthropogenic
burning, used by hunter-gatherers to enhance the
productivity of nondomesticated plants and animals (e.g., Smith 2011).1
Although most scholars today recognize that
hunter-gatherers employed systematic burning and
other management techniques to modify local habitats, there is considerable debate about the magnitude of such practices and their overall impact on
the environment. Some ecologists and environmental scientists argue that the scale of environmental modification is greatly exaggerated in the
current anthropological literature. Vale (1998:231,
2002:7) cautions that this perspective is creating a
new "myth" or "revisionist history" about Native
Americans, one in which they modified and economically enhanced vast swathes of land (see also
Allen 2002; Barrett et al. 2005; Parker 2002). Vale
and others believe that relatively small areas were
typically altered when such management practices
were employed. More importantly, they argue that
major transformations in the composition and
structure of plant communities often attributed to
Native fire management by anthropologists can
be best explained by natural, nonanthropogenic
ecological processes.
Significantly, the field of archaeology has been
relatively quiet throughout this debate. Although
some innovative research is now taking place,
particularly in the Northwest, there has been little systematic movement to incorporate TREM
implications into the method and theory of huntergatherer research in North American archaeology. In some regions, such as California, archaeological studies ofhunter-gatherers continue to be
implemented with little reference to past man-

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

agement practices, even though they have been
discussed in the local anthropological literature
for many decades (e.g., Anderson 2005; Bean
and Lawton 1976; Lewis 1993). This is unfortunate on two counts.
First, since the 1940s, when Omer Stewart began researching his massive synthesis of indigenous burning in North America, the majority of
the anthropological research on TREM has been
based on ethnohistorical and ethnographic research. Although detailed analyses of these observations have led to major contributions to our
understanding of indigenous resource management strategies (e.g., Blackburn and Anderson
1993; Boyd 1999; Deur and Turner 2005; Fowler
et al. 2003; Turner and Peacock 2005), there are
well-recognized constraints in relying primarily
on these sources to study past Native practices,
particularly those originating before European
contact (Deur and Turner 2005:20-28).
A particularly vexing problem is that our current understanding of TREM practices in many
regions of North America has been greatly determined by the timing, methods, and impacts of
European exploration and settlement. For example, along the Pacific coast of North America,
early settler accounts, ethnographic observations,
and tribal memories of anthropogenic burning by
hunter-gatherers vary greatly (Boyd 1999; Lewis
1993). Along the central and southern California
coasts —areas colonized in the late 1700s by
Franciscan missionaries who implemented fire
suppression policies—recollections of anthropogenic burning "had long faded from cultural
memory by the late 19th and early 20th centuries" (Timbrook et al. 1993:118). In other
places, there are few or no firsthand ethnographic
observations of anthropogenic burning, since the
earliest trained anthropologists did not go into the
field until after the implementation of federal
and state fire suppression policies that prohibited
Native peoples from setting fires in wildlands
(see Lightfoot and Parrish 2009:94-97). Among
some tribal groups, elders can recount oral traditions of anthropogenic burning, but often they
can provide few specific details of the process
(e.g., on fire ignition, control, frequency, patch
size, etc.) since they grew up after government
fire restrictions had been implemented (Deur
2009; Lepofsky et al. 2005a:224).

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

The heavy reliance on ethnohistorical and
ethnographic observations to make the case for
TREM in the anthropological literature is an important factor in current debates about the scale
and ecological impact of these practices. Some
scholars have raised criticisms about the highly
"selective" and "biased" use of a few historical
sources to paint "careless generalizations" about
the degree to which Native Americans modified
local environments (Allen 2002:145,160; Barrett
et al. 2005:31-32; Vale 2002:6-7). They contend
that a full evaluation of the problem will not be
possible until other lines of empirical evidence,
preferably involving "scientific and ecological
perspectives," are brought to bear on this issue
(Allen 2002:163-166; Barrett et al. 2005:32-33).
Clearly, archaeology should be a crucial component of this dialogue.
Second, by largely abstaining from the ongoing debate about the scale and ecological impact
of TREM practices, archaeologists are overlooking an excellent opportunity to contribute to a series of important and broadly relevant issues concerning the contemporary management of open
spaces and public lands. While various concerns
have been raised about the integration of traditional ecological knowledge with modern resource management practices (Hunn et al. 2003;
Nadasdy 1999), it is clear that "understanding
the role of humans in ecosystem history is a fundamental first step in managing ecosystems today" (Lepofsky 2009:161). Resource managers
are experimenting with new policies and practices
for managing contemporary ecosystems that will
enhance species richness and diversity, promote
the growth of indigenous species over exotics, and
reduce the risks from major firestorms. In creating the next generation of treatment protocols,
there is movement in the field of restoration ecology to experiment with traditional ecological
knowledge in the management, treatment, and
rehabilitation of ecosystems (Anderson 2005;
Clewell and Aronson 2007; Egan and Howell
2001; Fowler et al. 2003; Mason et al. 2012; Society for Ecological Restoration 2004). Questions
are now being asked about the agency of Native
people in shaping past fire regimes and vegetation
patterns. What kinds of strategies did they employ
in regards to the timing, intensity, and extent of
traditional burns in specific kinds of vegetation

287

communities? Did these fire management practices increase species richness and decrease fuel
loads over the long term? How can traditional
practices, in concert with modern range and forest management protocols, provide new insights
for managing wildlands today?
We believe that archaeology can make significant contributions to the study of anthropogenic
burning and other management practices among
hunter-gatherers that can help address these broadly
relevant questions. The diachronic perspective of
archaeology is well suited for providing critical information about TREM practices at the landscape
scale and their implications for understanding past
fire regimes and vegetation succession patterns
over many centuries, spanning precontact and contact times. In this article, we follow Lepofsky
(2009:162-163) in arguing that the systematic
study of past TREM practices will require some rethinking in how we undertake the study of huntergatherer societies. Specifically, we argue that this
will involve modifications in our standard procedures for undertaking archaeological research toward creating new kinds of collaborative, interdisciplinary eco-archaeological programs.
The purposes of this article are twofold. One is
to address the challenges of studying traditional
resource and environment management in archaeology and why we have, until quite recently,
been reluctant to study these practices among
hunter-gatherer societies despite their prominent
discussion in the anthropological literature for
more than five decades. The other purpose is to
explore how archaeologists can contribute to the
study of anthropogenic burning by rethinking
some of our protocols in contemporary archaeological research. This latter section is based on recent work by various colleagues in archaeological and related environmental disciplines, as well
as our ongoing study of historic and late Holocene
hunter-gatherers in central California.
The Challenges of Studying
Past Management Practices
Theoretical Issues
There is a long tradition in North American archaeology of viewing hunter-gatherer societies
separately from agrarian people who intentionally

288

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

manipulated the environment to increase the productivity of specific resources using horticultural
or agricultural practices (i.e., the classic forager/
farmer dichotomy [Erickson 2006:241-242]).
Early anthropologists, such as Alfred Kroeber
(1925), drew a distinction between passive foragers, who exclusively collected available resources from the landscape (leaving only footprints), and agrarian groups, who constructed
anthropogenic landscapes that were the product of
direct manipulation of particular plant resources
and vegetative communities. This dichotomous
perspective remained a common theme in the
writings of some of our most influential anthropologists into the late twentieth century (Ingold
1987:70-73; Wolf 1982:91-92).
However, this long-held view began to unravel in the archaeological literature in the 1980s,
when scholars began to rethink the distinctions
between hunting/gathering and agrarian societies,
recognizing the broad gradient of societies that
employed various forms of cultivation—used here
in the broad sense to refer to any practices that enhanced the production of natural resources, not
just cultigens per se (i.e., resources dependent on
human intervention for their reproduction [Ford
1985; Harris 1989]). Bruce Smith's (2001) masterly overview of this subject created a pragmatic
framework for placing various hunter-gatherer
and agrarian societies along a continuum of food
production, showing that many classic huntergatherers were part of a broader class of "lowlevel food producers" who employed various
methods of cultivation (weeding, tilling, transplanting, sowing, strategic burning) to tend plants
across the broader landscape but for whom the
majority of important plant foods were not the
products of intensive horticulture.
Employing niche construction theory, some
archaeologists are now conceptualizing huntergatherer resource enhancement practices within a
wider evolutionary framework—one that recognizes how a diverse range of life-forms modify
their environments, producing new kinds of selective pressures on succeeding generations of
organisms inhabiting those niches (RowleyConwy and Layton 2012; Smith 2007, 2011;
Zeder 2012). Niche construction theory suggests
that TREM activities among hunter-gatherers
should not be viewed as anomalous or idiosyn-

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

cratic but, rather, as part of broader evolutionary
processes that can have long-term implications for
both habitats and associated life-forms. In addition, recent research considering management
practices as a broader process of "landscape domestication," in which the cultivation of wild indigenous plants and animals reconfigured the
types and distributions of biological communities,
is providing a new perspective for rethinking human/environmental interactions among huntergatherers (e.g., Balee 2006; Erickson and Balee
2006; Yen 1989).
Scholars are now making important advances
in the study of hunter-gatherers and resource enhancement strategies employing archaeological
and ecological data sets in such areas as the American Northwest, the Southeast, New England, the
Plains, and California (e.g., Boyd 2002; Clark
and Royall 1995; Gassaway 2009; Hammett
1991,1992; Hammett and Lawlor 2004; Lepofsky
and Lertzman 2008; Lepofsky et al. 2005a; Lepofsky et al. 2005b; Patterson and Sassaman 1988;
Weiser and Lepofsky 2009). Yet there has been little movement to systematically incorporate the
study of indigenous landscape management practices into the method and theory of hunter-gatherer research in North American archaeology.
This is evident in many of the theoretical approaches employed in the study of hunter-gatherers, such as those deriving from early versions
of optimal foraging models (e.g., diet breadth,
patch choice, central place foraging), which have
been highly influential in archaeological research
(Bettinger 1991:83-111; Kelly 1995:73-110).
These studies analyze hunter-gatherers as immediate-return foragers who maximize returns based
on resource encounter frequency and caloric return rates. They assume that hunter-gatherers
made instantaneous decisions about the procurement of resources as they were encountered during foraging activities. In highlighting the immediacy of hunter-gatherer movements, decisions,
and foraging practices, these models have tended
to preclude archaeologists from addressing research questions about economic activities that involved longer-term planning and delayed returns,
such as the management of resource patches
through fire or other cultivation methods (see critiques in Erickson 2006:243; Smith 2006:300;
Zeder 2012:257-258).

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

Our purpose is not to criticize optimal foraging models for something they were never intended to analyze. We acknowledge that a new
generation of evolutionary ecology models is
now being developed to examine delayed-return economies and the transition to agriculture
using a variety of concepts (e.g., future discounting, cooperation, proprietary use rights,
ideal free distribution, cultural transmission theory [Bettinger 1998, 2006; Kennett et al. 2006;
Tucker 2006; Winterhalder and Kennett 2006]).
As these models are refined, they should contribute greatly to the study of resource enhancement practices, but they have yet to make a major impact on mainstream hunter-gatherer
research.
Another factor that has impeded archaeologists from seriously investigating landscape management practices among hunter-gatherer societies is the perceived link to more intensive
agrarian practices. The cultivation methods of
hunter-gatherers are often described as examples
of "proto-agriculture" or "semi-agriculture" and
compared with those of farmers (Anderson
2005:252-253; Bean and Lawton 1976). While
not discounting the potential insights that TREM
may offer in understanding the rise of agriculture,
it is highly problematic to place these economic
practices at an intermediary stage on an evolutionary path between hunting-gathering and agriculture (Erickson 2006:241-243; Smith 2001:25;
Yen 1989:66-71). This directional evolutionary
alignment has hampered archaeologists from analyzing indigenous landscape management as part
of the common repertoire of "real" hunter-gatherers. Instead, it has fostered a perspective that
these practices are transitional, highly situational,
and relatively uncommon and that they should be
analyzed as part of the broader process of agricultural adoption.
It is time that archaeologists recognize that
landscape management practices may have played
an important and enduring role in many North
American hunter-gatherer economies. Recent syntheses indicate that many hunter-gatherer societies
that maintained resource enhancement practices
did so over many centuries or millennia (Diehl
and Waters 2006; Lightfoot and Parrish 2009;
Rowley-Conwy and Layton 2012; Smith 2006;
Wills 1995). Burning, collecting, weeding, tillage,

289

pruning, seed broadcasting, and other cultivation
methods may have been precursors to the development of agriculture in some cases, but in many
other situations these methods were strategically
incorporated into various hunter-gatherer lifeways to produce stable, long-term economies and
social organizations that were distinct from those
of agrarian societies.
Some resource enhancement strategies involved the creation of domesticated landscapes
designed to enhance the productivity and richness
of various suites of plants and animals (e.g., Erickson 2006:243; Yen 1989). These kinds of
economies, based on the intentional transformation of a potentially broad range (gradients) of
ecological communities across the landscape, differed from those of field agriculturalists who often focused on the production of a few genetically
modified cultigens (Erickson 2006:243-244).
Rather, in cases of landscape domestication, people typically worked at broader scales to promote
the richness, productivity, and predictability of a
multitude of plants and animals that could be employed for food, medicines, raw materials, and
ceremonial regalia. In maintaining a flexible relationship with local resources, which were not
wholly dependent on human intervention for their
reproductive success, hunter-gatherers maintained
their ability to choose from diverse constellations
of resources from season to season and year to
year depending on local environmental and social
conditions. Shipek (1993:381) also notes that the
timing and organization of labor for these kinds of
economies may have been more evenly distributed throughout the year, in contrast to the intermittent, concentrated efforts of agrarian people involved in the production of field crops.
Still another factor that has hampered archaeologists from seriously investigating TREM issues is how we conceptualize resource and environmental management. As Fowler and Lepofsky
(2011), Lertzman (2009), and others note, management can be a loaded term, which in contemporary usage may imply some form of collective
control over resources and land to produce some
desired future condition. It is true that some
hunter-gatherer groups may have initiated collective strategies designed to enhance the overall
abundance, diversity, and availability of economic
resources on a landscape scale. But many other

290

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

niche construction activities may have focused on
enhancing particular resources, more localized in
scale and less directed toward producing broader
ecological outcomes. However, the cumulative
effects of many small acts over time may still
have produced significant and novel anthropogenic landscape effects, as exemplified by the
practice of anthropogenic burning.
People burn their environments for many different reasons. Some burning may be initiated as
a form of community-level resource management
to create specific kinds of habitats or successional
stages (Turner and Peacock 2005:126-127). For
example, Lightfoot and Parrish (2009:14-36,
94-122) argue that people may have enhanced the
productivity and richness of some California
ecosystems by initiating a rotational sequence of
small fires, creating and sustaining patchy mosaics of vegetation stands at different stages of
succession in a region. Different combinations
of herbaceous plants, insects, and animals thrive
in the first few years after a grassland or chaparral habitat is burned than in subsequent years
(Keeley 2002:310-312; Lewis 1993). Theoretically, within a relatively small territory, a huntergatherer community could have created a diverse
patchwork of unevenly aged habitats containing
different mixes of nuts, seeds, fruits, greens, tubers, birds, and other game. By igniting small
patches regularly within a multiyear rotational
cycle, hunter-gatherer groups could have reaped
the harvests of new-growth vegetation (and the
animals attracted to it) from recently burned
stands, as well as from plants in mature habitats
at later successional stages (e.g., Lightfoot and
Parrish 2009:100-105).
Anthropogenic burning may have also been
initiated by individuals or smaller kin groups for
a variety of other reasons. The proximate purposes of these fires may have been to control insects or pests, to open up pathways, to enhance a
patch of specific plants, to hunt game, and so on
(e.g., Lewis 1993). In some cases, these smallscale practices may have had minimal impact on
the environment. However, depending on the frequency, timing, extent, and placement of fires, the
consequences of these sustained acts may have resulted in the indirect production of novel and diverse successional mosaics at a broader scale.
For example, Bird et al. (2008) describe how

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

Aboriginal Australian women burn small patches
to enhance the hunting of small, burrowing prey.
The intent of these burns is not to enhance plant
collecting, the hunting of larger game, or the production of landscape fire mosaics per se. However, depending on the number of women involved and the frequency at which camps were
moved, the outcome was the creation of a finegrained mosaic of habitats with greater biological
resource availability than that produced by natural
fire regimes alone.
We believe that it behooves archaeologists to
employ a more inclusive operating definition of
TREM that spans a continuum of resource enhancement activities ranging from highly directed, community-based, landscape-scale practices to less coordinated, individualized, and
localized scales of action involving various forms
of niche construction (Smith 2007, 2011; Zeder
2012:257-259). In taking this position, we recognize that hunter-gatherer resource management
practices may include a diverse range of activities
that shaped, modified, and enhanced local environments at various scales and produced many
different outcomes, some deliberate and others
less directed or even inadvertent.
Methodological Issues
It is one thing to argue that past hunter-gatherers
across North America may have employed resource management practices, such as anthropogenic burning (e.g., Stewart 2002). It is still another to demonstrate this using empirical data.
Another major factor in why North American archaeologists have been reluctant to address indigenous management practices among huntergatherers is the significant challenge that is
acknowledged in documenting anthropogenic
burning and other resource enhancement methods
in archaeological contexts.
This is certainly the case in Australia and the
Amazon, where archaeologists have been at the
forefront of studying the anthropogenic landscapes created through TREM practices (e.g.,
Black et al. 2007; Erickson 2006; Jones 1969).
Landscape management practices employed by
hunter-gatherers are often subtle and not prone to
leave smoking guns in the archaeological record.
As Bowman (1998:394-395) notes in his discussion of Tasmanian Aborigines, there is no neces-

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

sary relationship between the level of sophistication in anthropogenic burning skills and the complexity of associated tool kits. In fact, there appears to be little relationship between
sophisticated knowledge of fire management and
specific kinds of artifacts or technological innovations that will readily distinguish them from
other peoples (e.g., Lewis 1991:281-282).
Furthermore, some resource enhancement practices, such as anthropogenic burning, may mimic
natural disturbances, often making them difficult
to distinguish from natural ecological processes
(Lepofsky 2009:162; Lepofsky and Lertzman
2008:138-139; Lepofsky et al. 2005a:219). The
study of fire management among hunter-gatherers
involves detecting and documenting such subtle
shifts in the relative densities of indigenous, economically important plant species and vegetation
communities commonly found in the local region.
This is in contrast to investigations of agrarian systems, which are marked by the analysis of one or
a few domesticated species (sometimes foreign to
the region) that can be readily identified in the archaeological record by morphological and/or genetic markers.
Collaborative Eco-Archaeological Research
Despite these formidable challenges, we believe
that archaeologists can make significant contributions to the ongoing debate about the magnitude and ecological impact of anthropogenic
burning. However, it will require the creation of
novel interdisciplinary approaches integrating archaeological research with relevant ecological,
historical, and ethnographic sources of information. As Bowman (1998:395) and Lepofsky and
Lertzman (2008:130) emphasize, these types of
eco-archaeological research programs are still in
their infancy. We have spent several years experimenting with one such approach in our study of
resource managers in central California. Specifically, we have been investigating the magnitude
and frequency of anthropogenic burning in the
Ano Nuevo State Reserve near Santa Cruz, California (Figure 1). Based on these experiences, as
well as those of others attempting to implement
similar kinds of projects, we think that these ecoarchaeological approaches will be most successful when they partner with tribes, develop coor-

291

dinated programs for integrating archaeological
and historical ecological research, and generate
testable expectations for evaluating resource management practices using archaeological and ecological data.
Partnerships with Tribal Groups
Our investigation of anthropogenic burning and
other resource management strategies has been
greatly facilitated by working closely with tribal
elders and scholars. In fact, we believe that these
kinds of studies may provide one avenue for
building the foundations of long-term collaborative research programs with tribal groups, an issue of increasing concern in North American archaeology (e.g., Kerber 2006; Silliman 2008).
Descendant communities are often concerned
with the state of their local environments and the
health of indigenous plant and animal resources
that continue to be employed as foods, medicine,
and raw materials for making baskets, ceremonial
regalia, and other cultural objects. It can be mutually beneficial for tribal groups to establish relationships with archaeologists as part of the study
of landscape management practices, which may
provide new insights for restoration treatments designed to enhance local biodiversity, habitat vitality, and the availability of traditional resources.
Native elders and scholars will be critical partners
in eco-archaeological studies by providing information about indigenous management drawn
from their own daily activities, their oral histories
and traditions, and language related to burning
(Bird et al. 2005:449; Deur 2009; Lepofsky et al.
2005a; Mason etal. 2012).
Our research program in central California is
being undertaken in close collaboration with
members of the Amah Mutsun Tribal Band, who
have a keen interest in enhancing the health and
vigor of indigenous plants and animals that are
still providing sources of traditional food, medicine, basket making, and dance regalia. Recently,
the tribe secured an agreement with the California Department of Parks and Recreation (CDPR)
designating Quiroste Valley (so named for the
site's aboriginal community) as a "State Cultural
Preserve" in the Ano Nuevo State Reserve.
Quiroste Valley, a well-drained valley tucked into
the Coast Ranges a few kilometers from the coast,
is rich in cultural resources and has been a major

292

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

Figure 1. The Quiroste Valley Cultural Preserve study area in Aiio Nuevo State Reserve, California.

locus of our research (see Figure 1). In designating this area a State Cultural Preserve, CDPR
will work collaboratively with the tribe in managing and restoring its floral and faunal communities. Both the tribe and CDPR are interested in
melding the best of modern landscape management protocols with those from ancient practices
to revive indigenous habitats in an area that is recovering from large-scale industrial logging, cattle ranching, and agriculture throughout much of
the latter nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The Integration of Archaeological and
Historical Ecological Research
Another critical component for the study of indigenous resource management is to integrate the
archaeological work in local regions with state-ofthe-art research in historical ecology. Fire histories may be constructed using a suite of methods:
dendroecology that tracks the frequency of fires
through time by analyzing fire scars across the
ring structures of certain species of trees; sedi-

ment cores from historic wetlands that yield accumulation rates of charcoal as proxies for past
fire events, as well as pollen counts and frequencies that provide information on vegetation transformations over time; and analyses of silica phytoliths from modern soils and paleosols that can
indicate significant vegetation changes in the past.
There is an extensive literature about the efficacy of employing these various methods, as well
as their potential constraints in documenting fire
histories and ecological changes (Bowman
1998:395-400; Carle 2008:29-31; Clark and
Royall 1995; Evett et al. 2007; Hotchkiss et al.
2007; McWethy et al. 2009; Whitlock et al. 2008).
Document- and imagery-based historical ecology, using postcolonial spatial and narrative
sources, can also provide important and highly detailed insights about local systems' responses to
changing land uses and anthropogenic perturbations (Whipple et al. 2011).
In sum, it is best to employ multiple lines of evidence in building fire histories for local regions

Lightfoot et a l j

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

and for understanding vegetation changes over
time (Bowman 1998:404-405; Lepofsky and
Lertzman 2008:139-140; Lepofsky et al. 2005a).
Furthermore, in recognizing that fire regimes vary
significantly over space and time, investigations of
anthropogenic burning must be localized to specific
areas and tribal peoples (Bird et al. 2008:14800;
Black et al. 2007:478; Hallam 1979:46).
A common criticism of anthropological studies
of indigenous burning is that natural ecological
processes have not been adequately addressed in
accounting for past fire events (Allen 2002; Parker
2002). Fire frequency is influenced by such factors
as fuel buildup, fuel moisture, and ignition
sources, which under nonanthropogenic conditions are controlled primarily by precipitation,
temperature, and lightning (Pyne 1991; van Wagtendonk 2006). Small changes in temperatures
over extended durations can have major implications for past fire regimes (Sprugel 1991:12-13).
There is growing evidence that extended climatic
events involving cooler temperatures (e.g., the
Little Ice Age) reduced fire frequencies, while periods of warmer and drier conditions (e.g., the
Medieval Climatic Anomaly) increased them
(Hotchkiss et al. 2007; Sprugel 1991; Whitlock et
al. 2008). Thus, in modeling the relationship of fire
regimes, vegetation patterns, and archaeological
remains, we must take into account the determining role that climate has played in driving the frequency, spatial extent, severity, and seasons of
fires (Black et al. 2007; Hotchkiss et al. 2007;
Lepofsky and Lertzman 2008; Lepofsky et al.
2005b; Whitlock et al. 2008).
Our research at Quiroste Valley has also integrated vegetation mapping, geomorphological investigations, and survey work to locate suitable
, ecological sites for obtaining additional lines of
evidence. In our landscape-scale study with the
Amah Mutsun, we detected various hunter-gatherer sites, collected wedge samples from nearby
redwood stumps for dendroecological analysis,
excavated a number of off-site locations to collect
phytolith samples, and cored two wetlands (Skylark Pond, Laguna de las Trancas), which we are
analyzing to quantify temporal changes in pollen,
microscopic charcoal, macroscopic charcoal, and
phytolith assemblages. By correlating palynological changes with relative densities of charcoal
size fractions that represent fires at local and re-

293

gional scales, we will use these wetland cores to
link vegetation changes to fire regimes from the
early Holocene through the historic periods.
Archaeological Expectations
As noted above, it is not expected that the fire
management activities of hunter-gatherers would
necessarily produce readily identifiable markers
in the archaeological record, such as major technological transformations, novel tools, or genetically modified plant remains. Rather, we expect
to observe more subtle markers, such as increased
evidence for long-term successional-stage vegetation, as well as organizational changes denoting
how people were using, occupying, and modifying the local landscape. Below we outline five
kinds of expectations about the relationship of fire
regimes, vegetation patterns, and archaeological
remains that may be useful in investigating past
anthropogenic burning using an eco-archaeological approach.
Fire Regimes and Vegetation Patterns. One
set of expectations concerns the delineation of
what fire regimes and vegetation patterns would
have looked like in a local region under nonanthropogenic conditions and under different scenarios of landscape management practices.
Cuthrell et al. (2012) suggest that natural fire
regimes, in which landscape fires are the result of
lightning ignitions, can serve as the null hypothesis for the investigation of anthropogenic burning. Nonanthropogenic fire regimes may be modeled by incorporating data on lightning strike
frequency and ignition rate with vegetation succession models (e.g., Syphard et al. 2006). In
simulating the frequency rates of natural fires
and how local vegetation communities may have
responded to these conditions, an expected baseline model for long-term vegetation under nonanthropogenic fire regimes can be generated for a local region. The magnitude of anthropogenic
burning and its overall impact on the environment
can then be assessed by comparing the observed
paleoenvironmental and archaeobotanical findings from the field with the baseline predictions
for natural fire regimes. This can be done in several ways; two of these will serve as examples.
First, fire-return intervals from fire-scar dendroecological studies can be compared with the
baseline predictions. If the observed fire-return in-

294

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

tervals from the ecological investigations are not
statistically distinct from those expected for natural fire regimes, then we may conclude that there
is little evidence that fire management took place.
However, if observed and expected fire-return
intervals do differ significantly, then the case for
anthropogenic burning may be supported. Second,
pollen from sediment cores and archaeobotanical
remains from excavated contexts can be compared with the baseline predictions for vegetation
patterns. If the observed vegetation patterns from
the field studies compare favorably with those expected under natural fire regimes, then this may
suggest that minimal anthropogenic burning took
place, while deviation in vegetation patterns from
baseline predictions would bolster the case for fire
management.
One advantage of studying anthropogenic
burning on the central coast of California is that
natural sources of ignition (lightning strikes) are
relatively rare, as the frequency of lightning in the
state increases with distance from the Pacific
Ocean and elevation (van Wagtendonk and Cayan
2008). In this area, recent fire ecology studies
have identified fire regimes in the late Holocene
with fire-return intervals at a frequency much
greater than that expected from lightning strikes
or natural fire occurrences alone (Greenlee and
Langenheim 1990; Keeley 2002; Stephens and
Fry 2005). In summarizing this literature, Cuthrell
et al. (2012) note that nonanthropogenic fire
regimes are characterized by fire-return intervals
on the order of a century or more. The regional
successional pattern for open flatlands and hillsides is characterized by transitions from grasslands to coastal scrub shrublands and then to either mixed conifer or oak/bay woodlands, with the
tempo of succession governed by local environmental conditions (Keeley 2002,2005; McBride
1974; Williams et al. 1987). Under nonanthropogenic fire conditions, woodland and shrubland
communities would thrive in areas such as
Quiroste Valley. In contrast, coastal grasslands are
disturbance-dependent communities, requiring
regular grazing, tillage, or burning to persist. We
believe that the historic large-scale grasslands
along the central California coast may be the
product of indigenous fire management practices
characterized by frequent, small, low-intensity
anthropogenic burns (Cuthrell et al. 2012; see

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

Weiser and Lepofsky 2009 for a case example
from Washington).
Foodways. The resources harvested by huntergatherers for foods, medicines, raw materials,
and other needs represent a critical database for
the study of management practices. Archaeologists can examine the suite of plants and animals
processed, consumed, and deposited at sites to
evaluate how they compare with the baseline expectations for resources exploited from habitats
supported by nonanthropogenic fire regimes. As
with paleoecological data sets, the degree of conformity to the baseline model will suggest
whether fire management practices were employed. With the development of sustained burning practices, we expect to observe significant
shifts in the type, diversity, and distribution of
plant and animal resources used by local groups.
Furthermore, we expect more of the vegetative resources utilized to be fire-dependent, fire-adapted,
and/or disturbance-dependent species.
In our ongoing archaeological investigations in
Quiroste Valley, particularly at CA-SMA-113, we
have recovered a rich and dense assemblage of archaeobotanical remains that dates from cal A.D.
1000 to 1700. Significantly, the majority of the
plant food resources used at this site were harvested from grassland communities (see Cuthrell
et al. 2012). Particularly, grasses (Poaceae), tarweeds {Madia spp.), clover (Trifolium spp.), composites (Asteraceae), and other forbs form the
overwhelming majority of the assemblage, while
nut remains are relatively few. The results to date
indicate that late Holocene people in Quiroste Valley were focusing on the exploitation of grassland
and open woodland resources, consistent with our
model expectations for anthropogenic burning.
Regional Settlement Systems. Anthropogenic
burning practices, if implemented on a regional
scale, would have posed organizational and logistical challenges for hunter-gatherers (Lightfoot et al. 2011). Members of local groups must
have been mobile and flexible enough in their
movements to facilitate the monitoring and management of varied resource patches across the
landscape. However, they must have also been
able to coordinate and disperse information about
when resource patches needed to be tended and
where resources were available for bulk harvesting, as well as overseeing the movement of peo-

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

pie across the region. Given these considerations,
we are exploring whether pyrodiversity
economies may have been embedded within logistically organized collector settlement systems
on the central coast of California. Semisedentary
residential bases represented places where members of local groups could periodically aggregate
for communication and planning, undertake communal food gathering and food processing events,
store bulk harvested goods, and perform mortuary
practices, ceremonies, and feasts. As one component of our fire management model, we envision
a regional settlement pattern that would include
semisedentary residential bases dispersed across
the region from which specialized task groups
and family units might tend nearby habitats or
bulk collect resources from patches managed
through burning. These work parties may have
been dispersed across the landscape during some
part of the annual cycle, setting up a series of
small camps and work spaces in the near and far
hinterlands of the residential bases.
Bulk Harvesting. The advent of logistically
organized economies that were associated with
fire management should also be correlated with
increasing evidence for the bulk collection of
foods and potentially with innovations in mass
harvesting, processing, and storage of food resources. Archaeological signatures of these kinds
of innovations might include evidence for game
drives (e.g., ambush sites, hunting blinds, etc.),
the use of large pit ovens, changes in hunting implements, new developments in ground-stone
technology used to process plant resources, evidence for feasting events, increases in the consumption of foods that could be most efficiently
harvested in bulk, new and more extensive storage facilities in villages, and the establishment of
outlying bulk harvesting camps.
Communal Social Organizations. The advent
of some kinds of landscape management practices
among hunter-gatherers may be associated with
changes in the social organizations of local groups
that would have facilitated game drives, aggregations of people for bulk harvesting and processing foods and raw materials, and the sponsorship of more elaborate community gatherings,
dances, and feasts. Changes in communal social
organizations may be detected in the archaeological record through a careful analysis of the spa-

295

tial layout of villages, the size and layout of house
structures, and the appearance and elaboration of
public architecture such as plaza space, dance
houses, and storage facilities.
Rethinking Archaeological Practices
We argue that the creation of collaborative, interdisciplinary eco-archaeological programs capable
of evaluating landscape management practices
among hunter-gatherers will necessitate modifications in our standard procedures for undertaking archaeological research. Below we consider
the implications that these kinds of programs will
have for undertaking field and laboratory work,
for coordinating and analyzing multiple data sets,
and for examining hunter-gatherers at the scale of
the longue duree.
Archaeological Field and Laboratory Methods
Close collaboration with tribes may necessitate
some significant modifications in excavation
strategies that focus on low-impact procedures,
minimizing disturbances to archaeological sites
but maximizing information from intact, welldated features with higher densities of interpretable archaeobotanical and faunal remains. As
outlined elsewhere (Lightfoot 2008), this kind of
approach involves a greater emphasis on surface
and near-surface investigations (geophysical surveys, topographic mapping, and systematic surface collections) specifically designed to delineate
site overall structure and distinguish discrete features from midden deposits prior to excavation. In
addition, forensic canines can be used to minimize
the potential for disturbance of human burials
(Lent 2007). The information gained from these
techniques can then be employed, in direct consultation with tribal scholars and other members
of the research team, to develop excavation strategies that are implemented with greater accuracy.
As part of this excavation strategy, archaeologists may need to modify their sampling strategies
for recovering archaeobotanical and small faunal
remains. In some areas, wet screening through 6or 3-mm mesh persists as the only technique used
to generate these assemblages, often resulting in
impoverished and biased data sets. Cuthrell et al.
(2012) advocate a systematic approach to macrobotanical and faunal sampling aimed at con-

296

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

structing data sets suitable for statistical analysis.
This method involves the collection of multiple
and robust flotation samples (i.e., number of identified specimens >300 per sample, often 5-10+
liters of deposit) from each interpretive archaeological context so that measures of central tendency and comparative statistical techniques can
be employed to identify meaningful differences in
contexts within and between sites. This stands in
contrast to the widespread practices of collecting
only small, judgmental flotation samples from a
site, which results in extreme selection bias, and
of collecting only one or a few column samples
from an entire site, which precludes characterization of the overall assemblage (Lennstrom and
Hastorf 1995).
Coordination of Multiple Data Sets
As outlined above, a critical component of the
next generation of hunter-gatherer research is to
coordinate within the study area the collection of
archaeological and ecological samples, including off-site sediment samples for the extraction of
phytoliths, cores from wetlands with intact pollen
and charcoal records, and dendroecological samples. Most of these ecological studies tend to be
done independently of the archaeological research, so integrating the research design and
field and laboratory work of eco-archaeological
projects will be a major step forward.
Our experience in implementing this kind of
eco-archaeological approach is that it can be a significant challenge to coordinate archaeological
research with the collection of fine-grained paleoecological data. The ideal scenario is to synchronize the collection of ecological samples so
that they are taken systematically in the nearby
hinterland of the archaeological remains of interest. But this presupposes that appropriate sources
of paleoecological data will be located near relevant archaeological sites, which is not always the
case. Thus, in choosing study areas for undertaking eco-archaeological studies of resource management, we must take into account not only the
archaeological potential but also the potential for
paleoecological data sets. To do this, we will need
to undertake archival research and landscapescale surveys to assess not only the archaeological possibilities but the presence of nearby wetlands with pollen and charcoal accumulations,

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

dendroecological samples, and sediment deposits
that may contain intact paleosols.
Archaeology of the Longue Duree
Hunter-gatherer studies will need to take place at
the scale of the longue duree. In constructing
records of fire histories, vegetation successions,
and climatic change over many millennia, it is
ideal to evaluate regional conditions before and
after humans first settled an area. In some cases,
the initial colonization of an area (especially islands) may be marked by significant changes in
fire frequencies and transformations in floral and
faunal populations, which are argued to be evidence for significant anthropogenic landscape
modifications (Kirch 1996; McWethy et al. 2009).
However, in many cases, the evidence may be
more muted and ambiguous, particularly where
management practices appear to have developed
in situ over many centuries. For example, there is
some controversy about the patterning and quantity of charcoal accumulation that may be expected when people begin to implement a systematic program of frequent, low-intensity, small
burns (Black et al. 2007:478; Hallam 1985:
11-12). We believe that the best course of action
is to take a diachronic perspective in examining
the interrelationship among archaeological remains, past fire events, and ecological and climatic changes over centuries or millennia when
these data are available.
In implementing this long-term eco-archaeological approach, the interface between prehistory
and history, when indigenous management systems became entangled in colonial regimes, is of
particular importance. The archaeology of colonialism should play a significant role in the study
of anthropogenic burning. We can examine how
landscape management practices were altered and
transformed during encounters between indigenous peoples and colonizers and how these
changes may have had long-term, cumulative effects among both Native and colonial cultures,
fire regimes, and local ecosystems. Were significant declines in the diversity and structural complexity of habitats instigated primarily by the termination of Native burning practices, as some
anthropologists have suggested? Or were they
due to the implementation of fire cessation policies that no longer allowed nonanthropogenic fire

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

regimes to continue, as some ecologists and environmental scientists have advocated? Or were
they because of other kinds of colonial landscape
modifications (e.g., livestock grazing, logging,
invasive plants, etc.) or a combination of all these
factors (Bowman 1998:399)? Critical evaluations
of these questions may provide important data for
developing treatment plans for enhancing the diversity, health, and sustainability of modern
ecosystems.
Conclusion
Despite many decades of debate in the anthropological literature, archaeologists have been reluctant to address questions about the magnitude
and impact of resource management practices
among hunter-gatherers in North America. We
argue that this reticence stems from multiple factors: a long tradition of viewing hunter-gatherers
as passive foragers who made minimal impacts on
the environment, a tendency to link those groups
with resource enhancement practices with agrarian societies, and a rather rigid definition of resource management. However, a major point of
this article is to argue that archaeologists need to
be more proactive in considering the possibility
that a diverse range of landscape management
activities may have been incorporated into the
economies of Native American hunter-gatherers.
Furthermore, we argue that hunter-gatherer societies that maintained landscape management practices over many centuries may be distinct in many
fundamental ways from agrarian people.
This article also addresses another significant
reason for the reticence of archaeologists: the difficulties of identifying landscape management
practices among hunter-gatherers using archaeological data. We believe that archaeologists can
make significant contributions to the ongoing debate about the magnitude and ecological impact of
anthropogenic burning, but that it will involve the
creation of new kinds of collaborative, interdisciplinary eco-archaeological programs. This will
require developing closer collaborations with Native American tribes; the coordination of archaeological research in concert with studies of past
fire ecology, vegetation patterns, and paleoclimatic conditions; rethinking how excavation work
is undertaken, specifically the sampling strategies

297

employed to recover archaeobotanical and faunal
remains; and expanding the spatial and temporal
scales of hunter-gatherer studies.
One approach for evaluating the magnitude
and impact of anthropogenic burning among past
hunter-gatherer groups is to model expected natural fire regimes and associated vegetation patterns given past environmental conditions. These
expectations can be employed as a null hypothesis for evaluating the existence of anthropogenic
burning. Deviations in the observed fire histories
and vegetation patterns from eco-archaeological
research may be indications of landscape management practices. If such management practices
were being implemented, then we expect changes
in fire frequency and plant communities to coincide with changes in the archaeological record.
The latter may include dramatic increases in the
exploitation of fire-dependent or fire-adapted
species, the advent of logistically organized collector settlement practices, evidence of bulk harvesting, and changes in communal social organizations. We believe that some degree of temporal
concordance should exist across these different
data sets (fire histories, vegetation patterns, and
archaeological findings) to generate well-supported interpretations about past landscape management practices.
The time is right for archaeologists to begin to
systematically evaluate research issues about
hunter-gatherer management practices. Given current concerns with restoration ecology, sustainable
economies, and the role that indigenous knowledge can play in contemporary resource management, it is imperative that archaeologists get off
the sidelines. In addressing this significant initiative, we propose that archaeologists create innovative eco-archaeological approaches with research objectives relevant not only to other
archaeologists but also to tribal entities, government agencies, conservation organizations, and
restoration ecologists. Lessons learned from this
research may contribute greatly to restoration
treatment plans that are being developed for the
management of tribal and public lands.
Acknowledgments. We appreciate greatly the help and support
from the Amah Mutsun Tribal Band and the California Department of Parks and Recreation in implementing our eco-archaeological research program in central California. We are
greatly indebted to the National Science Foundation (BCS-

298

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

0912162) and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation for
their generous support of the field and laboratory research involving hunter-gatherer resource enhancement strategies. We
are very grateful for the insightful and constructive reviews of
this article by Dana Lepofsky, Torben C. Rick, and other
anonymous reviewers for American Antiquity. We are most appreciative of the excellent editorial assistance and sage comments provided by Kenneth E. Sassaman and his staff at
American Antiquity.

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

Boyd, Matthew
2002 Identification of Anthropogenic Burning in the Paleoecological Record of the Northern Prairies: A New Approach. Annals of the Association of American Geographers
92:471^187.
Boyd, Robert T. (editor)
1999 Indian, Fire, and the Land. Oregon State University
Press, Corvallis.
Carle, David
2008 Introduction to Fire in California. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Clark, James C , and P. Daniel Royall
1995 Transformation of a Northern Hardwood Forest by AboReferences Cited
riginal (Iroquois) Fire: Charcoal Evidence from Crawford
Allen, Craig D.
Lake, Ontario, Canada. The Holocene 5:1-9.
2002 Lots of Lightning and Plenty of People: An EcologiClewell, Andre, and James Aronson
cal History of Fire in the Upland Southwest. In Fire, Na2007 Ecological Restoration: Principles, Values, and Structive Peoples, and the Natural Landscape, edited by Thomas
ture of an Emerging Profession. Island Press, Washington,
R. Vale, pp. 143-193. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
D.C.
Anderson, M. Kat
Cuthrell, Rob Q., Chuck Striplen, Mark G. Hylkema, and Kent
2005 Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the
G. Lightfoot
Management of California's Natural Resources. Univer2012 A Land of Fire: Anthropogenic Burning on the Censity of California Press, Berkeley.
tral Coast of California. In Contemporary Issues in CaliBalee, William
fornia Archaeology, edited by Terry L. Jones and Jennifer
2006 The Research Program of Historical Ecology. AnnuE. Perry, pp. 153-172. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek.
al Review of Anthropology 35:75-98.
Deur, Douglas
Barrett, Stephen W., Thomas Swetnam, and William L. Baker
2009 "A Caretaker Responsibility": Revisiting Klamath and
2005 Indian Fire Use: Deflating the Legend. Fire ManModoc Traditions of Plant Community Management.
agement Today 65(3):31-34.
Journal of Ethnobiology 29:296-322.
Bean, Lowell J., and Harry Lawton
Deur, Douglas, and Nancy J. Turner
1976 Some Explanations for the Rise of Cultural Complexity
2005 Introduction: Reassessing Indigenous Resource Manin Native California with Comments on Proto-Agriculture
agement, Reassessing the History of an Idea. In Keeping
and Agriculture. In Native Californians: A Theoretical RetIt Living: Traditions of Plant Use and Cultivation on the
rospective, edited by Lowell J. Bean and Thomas C. BlackNorthwest Coast ofNorth America, edited by Douglas Deur
burn, pp. 19-48. Ballena Press, Menlo Park.
and Nancy J. Turner, pp. 3-34. University of Washington
Bettinger, Robert L.
Press, Seattle.
1991 Hunter-Gatherers: Archaeological and EvolutionDiehl, Michael W., and Jennifer A. Waters
ary Theory. Plenum Press, New York.
2006 Aspects of Optimization and Risk During the Early
1998 Cultural, Human and Historical Ecology in the Great
Agricultural Period in Southeastern Arizona. In Behavioral
Basin: Fifty Years of Ideas About Ten Thousand Years of
Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture, edited by
Prehistory. In Advances in Historical Ecology, edited by
Douglas J. Kennett and Bruce Winterhalder, pp. 63-86. UniWilliam Balee, pp. 169-189. Columbia University Press,
versity of California Press, Berkeley.
New York.
Egan, Dave, and Evelyn A. Howell
2006 Agriculture, Archaeology, and Human Behavioral Ecol2001 Introduction. In The Historical Ecology Handbook: A
ogy. In Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to AgriRestorationist's Guide to Reference Ecosystems, edited by
culture, edited by Douglas J. Kennett and Bruce WinterDave Egan and Evelyn A. Howell, pp. 1-23. Island Press,
halder, pp. 304-322. University of California Press,
Washington, D.C.
Berkeley.
Erickson, Clark L.
Bird, Douglas W., Rebecca B. Bird, and Christopher H. Parker
2006 The Domesticated Landscapes of the Bolivian Ama2005 Aboriginal Burning Regimes and Hunting Strategies
zon. In Time and Complexity in Historical Ecology: Studin Australia's Western Desert. Human Ecology 33:443-464.
ies in the Neotropical Lowlands, edited by William Balee
Bird, Rebecca B., Douglas W. Bird, Brian F. Codding, Christoand Clark L. Erickson, pp. 235-278. Columbia Universipher H. Parker, and J. H. Jones
ty Press, New York.
2008 The "Fire Stick Farming" Hypothesis: Australian Abo- Erickson, Clark L., and William Balee
riginal Foraging Strategies, Biodiversity, and Anthro2006 The Historical Ecology of a Complex Landscape in Bopogenic Fire Mosaics. Proceedings of the National Acadlivia. In Time and Complexity in Historical Ecology: Studemy of Science 105:14796-14801.
ies in the Neotropical Lowlands, edited by William Balee
Black, Manu P., Scott D. Mooney, and Simon G. Haberle
and Clark L. Erickson, pp. 187-233. Columbia Universi2007 The Fire, Human and Climate Nexus in the Sydney
ty Press, New York.
Basin, Eastern Australia. The Holocene 17:469^180.
Evett, Rand R., Ernesto Franco-Vizcaino, and Scott L. Stephens
Blackburn, Thomas C , and M. Kat Anderson (editors)
2007 Phytolith Evidence for the Absence of a Prehistoric
1993 Before the Wilderness: Environmental Management
Grass Understory in a Jeffrey Pine-Mixed Conifer Forest
by Native Calif ornians. Ballena Press, Menlo Park.
in the Sierra San Pedro Martir, Mexico. Canadian Journal
Bowman, David M.
of Forestry Research 37:306-317.
1998 The Impact of Aboriginal Landscape Burning on the
Ford, Richard I.
Australian Biota. New Phytologist 140:385^-10.
1985 The Processes of Plant Food Production in Prehistoric

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

299

North America. In Prehistoric Food Production in North Keeley, Jon E.
America, edited by Richard I. Ford, pp. 1-18. Anthropo2002 Native American Impacts on Fire Regimes of the Callogical Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
ifornia Coastal Ranges. Journal of Biogeography
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
29:303-320.
Fowler, Catherine S., Pauline Esteves, Grace Goad, Bill Helmer,
2005 Fire History of the San Francisco East Bay Region and
and Ken Watterson
Implications for Landscape Patterns. International Journal of Wildland Fire 14:285-296.
2003 Caring for the Trees: Restoring Timbisha Shoshone
Land Management Practices in Death Valley National Park. Kelly, Robert L.
Ecological Restoration 21:302-306.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer
Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Fowler, Catherine S., and Dana Lepofsky
2011 Traditional Resource and Environmental Management. Kennett, Douglas J., Atholl Anderson, and Bruce Winterhalder
In Ethnobiology, edited by E. N. Anderson, Deborah
2006 The Ideal Free Distribution, Food Production and ColPearsall, Eugene Hunn, and Nancy Turner, pp. 285-304.
onization of Oceania. In Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture, edited by Douglas J. Kennett and Brace
Wiley-Blackwell, New York.
Winterhalder, pp. 265-288. University of California Press,
Gassaway, Linn
Berkeley.
2009 Native American Fire Patterns in Yosemite Valley: Archaeology, Dendrochronology, Subsistence, and Culture
Kerber, Jordan E. (editor)
Change in the Sierra Nevada. Society for California Ar2006 Cross-Cultural Collaboration: Native Peoples and Archaeology Proceedings 22:1-19.
chaeology in the Northeastern United States. University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Greenlee, Jason M., and Jean H. Langenheim
1990 Historic Fire Regimes and Their Relation to VegetaKirch, Patrick V.
tion Patterns in the Monterey Bay Area of California. Amer1996 Late Holocene Human-Induced Modifications to a Cenican Midland Naturalist 124:239-253.
tral Polynesian Island Ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 93:5296-5300.
Hallam, Sylvia J.
1979 Fire and Hearth: A Study ofAboriginal Usage and Eu- Kroeber, Alfred L.
1925 Handbook of the Indians of California. Bulletin 78, Buropean Usurpation in South-Western Australia. Australian
reau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution.
Institute of Aboriginal Studies, New Series No. 13. CanU.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
berra.
1985 The History of Aboriginal Firing. In Fire Ecology and Lennstrom, Heidi A., and Christine A. Hastorf
Management in Western Australian Ecosystems, edited by
1995 Interpretation in Context: Sampling and Analysis in
J. R. Ford, pp. 7-20. WAIT Environmental Studies Group
Paleoethnobotany. American Antiquity 60:701-721.
Report No. 14. Western Australian Institute of TechnoloLent, Susan
gy, Perth.
2007 Forensic Dogs Help Preserve Native American Burial Ground. California Transportation Journal 3(2): 16-17.
Hammett, Julia E.
Lepofsky, Dana
1991 Ecology of Sedentary Societies Without Agriculture:
2009 The Past, Present and Future of Traditional Resource
Paleoethnobotanical Indicators from Native California. Unand Environmental Management. Journal of Ethnobiolopublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology 29:161-166.
gy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
1992 The Shapes of Adaptation: Historical Ecology of AnLepofsky, Dana, Douglas Hallett, Ken Lertzman, Rolf Mathewes,
Albert McHalsie, and Kevin Washburn
thropogenic Landscapes in the Southeastern United States.
2005a Documenting Precontact Plant Management on the
Landscape Ecology 7:121-131.
Northwest Coast: An Example of Prescribed Burning in the
Hammett, Julia E., and Elizabeth J. Lawlor
Central and Upper Fraser Valley, British Columbia. In Keep2004 Paleoethnobotany in California. In People and Plants
ing It Living: Traditions of Plant Use and Cultivation on
in Ancient Western North America, edited by Paul E. Minthe Northwest Coast ofNorth America, edited by Douglas
nis, pp. 278-366. Smithsonian Books, Washington, D.C.
Deur and Nancy J. Turner, pp. 218-239. University of WashHarris, David R.
ington Press, Seattle.
1989 An Evolutionary Continuum of People-Planting Interactions. In Foraging and Farming: The Evolution ofPlant Lepofsky, Dana, and Ken Lertzman
Exploitation, edited by David R. Harris and G. C. Hillman,
2008 Documenting Ancient Plant Management in the
pp. 11-26. Unwin Hyman, Boston.
Northwest of North America. Botany 86:129-145.
Hotchkiss, Sara C , Randy Calcote, and Elizabeth A. Lynch
Lepofsky, Dana, Ken Lertzman, Douglas Hallett, and Rolf Math2007 Response of Vegetation and Fire to Little Ice Age Cliewes
mate Change: Regional Continuity and Landscape Het2005b Climate Change and Culture Change on the Southerogeneity. Landscape Ecology 22:25^-1.
ern Coast of British Columbia 2400-1200 cal. B.P.: An HyHunn, Eugene S., Darryll R. Johnson, Priscilla N. Russell, and
pothesis. American Antiquity 70:267-294.
Thomas F. Thronton
Lertzman, Ken
2003 Huna Tlingit Traditional Environmental Knowledge,
2009 The Paradigm of Management, Management Systems,
Conservation, and the Management of a "Wilderness" Park.
and Resource Stewardship. Journal of Ethnobiology
Current Anthropology 44(Suppl.):S79-S 103.
29:339-355.
Ingold, Tim
Lewis, Henry T.
1987 The Appropriation of Nature: Essays on Human
1991 Technological Complexity, Ecological Diversity, and
Ecology and Social Relations. University of Iowa Press,
Fire Regimes in Northern Australia: Hunter-Gatherer,
Iowa City.
Cowboy, Ranger. In Profiles in Cultural Evolution, editJones, Rhys
ed by A. Terry Rambo and Kathleen Gillogly, pp. 261-288.
Anthropological Papers No. 85. Museum of Anthropolo1969 Fire-Stick Farming. Australian Natural History
gy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
16:224-228.

300

AMERICAN ANTIQUITY

[Vol. 78, No. 2, 2013

Management Systems. In Before the Wilderness: Envi1993 Patterns of Indian Burning in California: Ecology and Ethnohistory. In Before the Wilderness: Environmental Manronmental Management by Native Californians, edited by
agement by Native Californians, edited by Thomas C. BlackThomas C. Blackburn and M. Kat Anderson, pp. 379-388.
burn and M. Kat Anderson, pp. 55-116. Ballena Press, MenBallena Press, Menlo Park.
lo Park.
Silliman, Stephen W. (editor)
2008 Collaborating at the Trowel's Edge: Teaching and
Lightfoot, Kent G.
Learning in Indigenous Archaeology. University of Arizona
2008 Collaborative Research Programs: Implications for the
Press, Tucson.
Practice of North American Archaeology. In Collaborating at the Trowel's Edge: Teaching and Learning in In- Smith, Bruce D.
digenous Archaeology, edited by Stephen W. Silliman, pp.
2001 Low-Level Food Production. Journal ofArchaeological
211-227. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Research 9:1^13.
Lightfoot, Kent G., Edward M. Luby, and Lisa Pesnichak
2006 Human Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Food
2011 Evolutionary Typologies and Hunter-Gatherer Research:
Production. In Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to
Rethinking the Mounded Landscapes of Central CaliforAgriculture, edited by D. J. Kennett and B. Winterhalder,
nia. In Hunter-Gatherer Archaeology as Historical Process,
pp. 289-303. University of California Press, Berkeley.
edited by Kenneth E. Sassaman and Donald H. Holly, pp.
2007 Niche Construction and the Behavioral Context of Plant
55-78. University of Arizona, Tucson.
and Animal Domestication. Evolutionary Anthropology
16:188-199.
Lightfoot, Kent G., and Otis Parrish
2009 California Indians and Their Environment: An Intro2011 General Patterns of Niche Construction and the Manduction. University of California Press, Berkeley.
agement of "Wild" Plant and Animal Resources by SmallScale Pre-Industrial Societies. Philosophical TransacMason, Larry, Germaine White, Gary Morishima, Ernesto Altions of the Royal Society B (Biological Sciences)
varado, Louise Andrew, Fred Clark, Mike Durglo, Sr., Jim
366:836-848.
Durglo, John Eneas, Jim Erickson, Margaret Friedlander,
Kathy Hamel, Colin Hardy, Tony Harwood, Faline Haven, Society for Ecological Restoration
Everett Isaac, Laurel James, Robert Kenning, Adrian
2004 The SER International Primer on Ecological RestoraLeighton, Pat Pierre, Carol Raish, Bodie Shaw, Steven
tion. Society for Ecological Restoration International,
Smallsalmon, Vernon Stearns, Howard Teasley, Matt
Tucson.
Weingart, and Spus Wilder
Sprugel, Douglas G.
1991 Disturbance, Equilibrium, and Environmental Vari2012 Listening and Learning from Traditional Knowledge
ability: What Is "Natural" Vegetation in a Changing Enand Western Science: A Dialogue on Contemporary Chalvironment? Biological Conservation 58:1-18.
lenges of Forest Health and Wildfire. Journal of Forestry
Stephens, Scott L., and Danny L. Fry
110:187-193.
2005 Fire History in Coast Redwood Stands in the NorthMcBride, Joe R.
eastern Santa Cruz Mountains, California. Fire Ecology
1974 Plant Succession in the Berkeley Hills, California.
1(1):2-19.
Madrono 22:317-380.
McWethy, David B., Cathy Whitlock, Janet M. Wilmshurst, Matt Stewart, Omer C.
S. McGlone, and Xun Li
2002 Forgotten Fires: Native Americans and the Transient
2009 Rapid Deforestation of South Island, New Zealand, by
Wilderness. Edited with an introduction by Henry T.
Early Polynesian Fires. The Holocene 19:883-897.
Lewis and M. Kat Anderson. University of Oklahoma Press,
Nadasdy, Paul
Norman.
1999 The Politics of TEK: Power and the "Integration" of
Syphard, Alexandra, Janet Franklin, and Jon Keeley
Knowledge. Arctic Anthropology 36(1-2): 1-18.
2006 Simulating the Effects of Frequent Fire on Southern
California Coastal Shrublands. Ecological Applications
Parker, Albert J.
16:1744-1756.
2002 Fire in Sierra Nevada Forests: Evaluating the Ecological
Impact of Burning by Native Americans. In Fire, Native Timbrook, Jan, John R. Johnson, and David D. Earle
Peoples, and the Natural Landscape, edited by Thomas R.
1993 Vegetation Burning by the Chumash. In Before the
Vale, pp. 233-267. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Wilderness: Environmental Management by Native Californians, edited by Thomas C. Blackburn and M. Kat AnPatterson, William A., and Kenneth E. Sassaman
derson, pp. 117-149. Ballena Press, Menlo Park.
1988 Indian Fires in the Prehistory of New England. In
Holocene Human Ecology in Northeastern North Ameri- Tucker, Bram
ca, edited by George P. Nichols, pp. 107-135. Plenum, New
2006 A Future Discounting Explanation for the Persistence
York.
of a Mixed Foraging-Horticulture Strategy Among the
Mikea of Madagascar. In Behavioral Ecology and the TranPeacock, Sandra L., and Nancy J. Turner
sition to Agriculture, edited by Douglas J. Kennett and Bruce
2000 "Just Like a Garden": Traditional Resource ManageWinterhalder, pp. 22-40. University of California Press,
ment and Biodiversity Conservation on the Interior Plateau
Berkeley.
of British Columbia. In Biodiversity ofNative America, edited by Paul E. Minnis and Wayne J. Elisens, pp. 133-179. Turner, Nancy J., and Sandra L. Peacock
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
2005 Solving the Perennial Paradox: Ethnobotanical Evidence for Plant Resource Management on the Northwest
Pyne, Stephen J.
Coast. In Keeping It Living: Traditions of Plant Use and
1991 Burning Bush: A Fire History ofAustralia. Henry Holt,
Cultivation on the Northwest Coast ofNorth America, editNew York.
ed by Douglas Deur and Nancy J. Turner, pp. 101-150. UniRowley-Conwy, Peter, and Robert Layton
versity of Washington Press, Seattle.
2012 Foraging and Farming as Niche Construction: Stable
and Unstable Adaptations. Philosophical Transactions of Vale, Thomas R.
the Royal Society B (Biological Sciences) 366:849-862.
1998 The Myth of the Humanized Landscape: An Example
Shipek, Florence C.
from Yosemite National Park. Natural Areas Journal
18:231-236.
1993 Kumeyaay Plant Husbandry: Fire, Water, and Erosion

Lightfoot et al.]

RETHINKING THE STUDY OF LANDSCAPE MANAGEMENT

301

pp. 215-242. School of American Research Press, Santa
2002 The Pre-European Landscape of the United States: Pristine or Humanized? In Fire, Native Peoples, and the NatFe, New Mexico.
ural Landscape, edited by Thomas R. Vale, pp. 1-39. Is- Winterhalder, Bruce, and Douglas J. Kennett
land Press, Washington, D.C.
2006 Behavioral Ecology and the Transition from Hunting
and Gathering to Agriculture. In Behavioral Ecology and
van Wagtendonk, Jan W.
the Transition to Agriculture, edited by Douglas J. Kennett
2006 Fire as a Physical Process. In Fires in California's
and Bruce Winterhalder, pp. 1-21. University of CaliforEcosystems, edited by Neil G. Sugihara, Jan W. van Wagnia Press, Berkeley.
tendonk, Kevin E. Shaffer, Joann Fites-Kaufman, and Andrea E. Thode,pp. 38-57. University of California Press, Wolf, Eric
Berkeley.
1982 Europe and the People Without History. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
van Wagtendonk, Jan W., and Daniel R. Cay an
2008 Temporal and Spatial Distribution of Lightning
Yen, Douglas E.
Strikes in California in Relation to Large-Scale Weather Pat1989 The Domestication of Environment. In Foraging
terns. Fire Ecology 4(l):34-56.
and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, edited
by David R. Harris and Gordon C. Hillman, pp. 55-75. UnWeiser, Andrea, and Dana Lepofsky
win Hyman, Boston.
2009 Ancient Land Use and Management of Ebey's Prairie,
Whidbey Island, Washington. Journal of Ethnobiology
Zeder, Melinda A.
29:184-212.
2012 The Broad Spectrum Revolution at 40: Resource Diversity, Intensification, and an Alternative to Optimal ForWhipple, Alison, Robin M. Grossinger, and Frank W. Davis
aging Explanations. Journal ofAnthropological Archaeology
2011 Shifting Baselines in a California Oak Savanna:
31:241-264.
Nineteenth Century Data to Inform Restoration Scenarios.
Restoration Ecology 19:88-101.
Whitlock, Cathy, Jennifer Marlon, Christy Briles, Andrea
Brunelle, Coin Long, and Patrick Bartlein
Note
2008 Long-Term Relations Among Fire, Fuel, and Climate
in the North-Western US Based on Lake-Sediment Stud1. Some may question whether we should categorize such
ies . International Journal of Wildland Fire 17:72-83.
groups with diverse cultivation techniques as hunter-gatherers
Williams, Kimberly, Richard J. Hobbs, and Steven P. Hamburg anymore; yet the concept still serves a heuristic purpose in de1987 Invasion of an Annual Grassland in Northern California
lineating those people who minimized their reliance on formal
by Baccharis pilularis ssp. consanguinea. Oecologica
domesticates (i.e., foods entirely dependent on humans for
72:461-465.
their propagation and survival).
Wills, Wirt H.
1995 Archaic Foraging and the Beginning of Food Production
in the American Southwest. In Last Hunters-First Farmers: New Perspectives on the Prehistoric Transition to Agri-Submitted March 26, 2012; Revised June 18, 2012;
culture, edited by T. Douglas Price and Anne B. Gebauer, Accepted September 26, 2012.

